# DESCRIPTION

## EXAMPLES

### Animal Studies

Animals were housed under a reversed 12:12 LD cycle (400 lux from white LED lamps) with food and water ad libitum. For phase-shifting studies, C57Bl/6 mice were maintained on running wheels in light tight chambers on a 12:12 LD cycle (400 lux from white LED lamps) and injected with drug at the indicated time points. The drugs were formulated in a vehicle consisting of 5% Koliphor-HS15 (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) 5% Cyclodextran (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) in 0.9% saline. This vehicle was warmed to 37° C. and the indicated drugs kept at a 100× stock in DMSO and mixed at the appropriate concentration to be administered at approximately 300 ul intraperitoneal injection (n=6 to 10). Where the time point of injection was in the dark, the procedure was conducted under dim red light. Where measuring phase-shifting, the mice were then placed in DD and allowed to free run for 14 days in DD, running wheel activity data was collected and analysed on Clocklab (Actimetrics, Wilmette, Ill.). For jet-lag studies, mice were maintained on running wheels in light tight chambers on a 12:12 LD cycle (400 lux from white LED lamps) and injected with drugs as above at ZT6 and the LD cycle was shifted 6 hours in advance. The onset of activity on each day was used to measure phase relative to the LD cycle.

### Tissue Collection

Animals were sacrificed under dim red light by cervical dislocation at 30, 60 and 120 minutes after the onset of the light pulse. The eyes were immediately removed to prevent any photic stimulation to the SCN. Sham-treated mice not given a light pulse were dissected at each time point. Brains were removed and placed into a brain matrix (Kent Scientific, Torrington Conn., USA). All procedures were performed in accordance with the UK Home Office Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 and the University of Oxford's Policy on the Use of Animals in Scientific Research. (PPL 70/6382 and 30/2812). Animals were sacrificed via Schedule 1 methods in accordance with the UK Home Office Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986.

SCN Tissue Collection: Animals were housed under a 12:12 LD cycle for 2 weeks with food and water ad libitum. Animals then received either a drug injection with a alteration in the light dark cycle as described in the experiment and at set points following drug administration were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Sham-treated mice not given a light pulse were dissected at each time point. Brains were removed and placed into a brain matrix (Kent Scientific, Torrington Conn., USA). Per2::Luc transgenic animals (as reported in Yoo et al, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004 Apr. 13; 101(15):5339-46) were obtained from Prof Joseph Takahashi, Northwestern University.

For punches for mRNA/protein analysis: A skin graft blade (Swann-Morton, Sheffield, UK) was positioned at Bregma −0.10 mm. A second blade was placed 1 mm (Bregma −1.10) caudal from the first, and a 1 mm thick brain slice was dissected. SCN punches were taken using a sample corer (1 mm internal diameter, Fine Science Tools GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) from the brain slice (n=4), flash frozen on dry ice and stored at −80° C. prior to RNA extraction.

For SCN slice culture: The brain was gently cut into a cube preserving the integrity of the SCN and cut into 200 uM slices in ice-cold oxygenated Hanks Balanced Salt Solution containing 100 nM MK801 (Sigma-Aldrich). The SCN was microdissected and transferred to membrane filter (Millicell Cell Culture Insert, 30 mm, hydrophilic PTFE, 0.4 μm, Millipore) and cultured in 300 uL DMEM prepared as detailed in the Per2::Luc Assay.

Phase Shifting: C57Bl/6 male mice (80 days or older) were maintained on running wheels in light tight chambers on a 12:12 LD cycle (100 lux from white LED lamps) on stable entrainment, were released in complete darkness. At set times as indicated in the experiments, the animals received an intraperitoneal injection (300 ul) of drug constituted in sterile saline with 5% Cyclodextrin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 5% Koliphor (Sigma-Aldrich) and then allowed to free run in DD, running wheel activity data were collected and analysed on Clocklab (Actimetrics, Wilmette, Ill.).

Re-entrainment: C57B/6 male mice (80 days or older) were maintained on running wheels in light tight chambers on a 12:12 LD cycle (100 lux from white LED lamps) and injected with drugs as above at ZT6. The LD cycle was immediately advanced by 6 h. Onset of activity on each day was used to measure phase relative to the LD cycle, data analysed on Clocklab.

### RNA Extraction and Sample Preparation

Total RNA was extracted using the microRNeasy column method (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Quality and quantity of RNA were measured using an Agilent Bioanalyzer and a Nanodrop1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Mass. USA), respectively.

Quantitative PCR (qPCR)

RNA samples were prepared as described for microarray hybridisation. cDNA was synthesized with a qScript cDNA synthesis kit (Quanta Biosciences, Gaithersburg, Md.), and quantitative PCR (qPCR) was conducted with Sybr green I and an SDS7700 thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif.). Relative quantification of transcript levels was done as described previously (Peirson et al., Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jul. 15; 31(14):e73.). The geometric mean of a minimum of three housekeeping genes was used for normalization (Gapdh, ActB, GusB and Rps9 for example).

Primer sequences below and from Jagannath et al., Cell. 2013 Aug. 29; 154(5):1100-11.

### Cell Lines and Culture

Cells from the U2OS (HTB-96) line were obtained, tested and identified. The cells were cultured in T-75 flasks, in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (P/S) at 37° C. in a humidified atmosphere at 5% CO2. The cells were subcultured every 2 to 4 days in a 1:2 to 1:6 ratio, in accordance with the ATCC recommendations. The cells were counted using a haemocytometer, and their viability in a culture was maintained at above 95%, measured with a Presto Blue exclusion assay according to the manufacturer's specifications. Cells were transfected with siRNAs (typically at 50 nM concentrations, sequences as previously listed), the CRE::Luc (pGL4.29[luc2P/CRE/Hygro] Vector, encoding Luc2P luciferin under the control of a strong cAMP response element (CRE) promoter containing 3 CRE elements within its sequence; Promega) reporter vector or cAMP-GLOSensor plasmid (Promega) as per manufacturer's instructions using either Lipofectamine RNAimax (Invitrogen) or Lipofectamine3000 (Invitrogen).

### Per2::Luc Cell Based Circadian Assays

U2OS cells stably transfected with a Per2::Luc reporter were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. For siRNA- and drug-based experiments, cells were seeded at 5,000 per well into white 384 well plates and transfected with 20 nM siRNA the next day. 2 days later, the cells were synchronized with 100 nM dexamethasone and the medium was replaced with phenol-red free DMEM supplemented with B-27 and 100 M luciferin potassium salt, requisite drugs formulated in DMSO as a 1000× stock was added, and then sealed. Per2::Luc rhythms were recorded from a BMG Labtech Fluostar Omega plate reader maintained at 36° C. and readings taken from each well every hour. Data were then analysed using either Multicycle or Brass rhythm analysis software.

**Per2::Luc Circadian Assays:**

Period2::Luciferase (Per2::Luc) stable U2OS transfects were cultured, as described above. A Greiner Bio-One 384 Well Plate (Polystyrene, F-bottom), was then seeded at 6000 cells per 50 μl well. Following a 24 hour period, the cells were treated with 0.1% dexamethasone, a glucocorticoid hormone analogue known to reset intracellular circadian rhythms, for 1 hour. Subsequently, the dexamethasone-containing medium was removed, the cells were washed with PBS and luciferin and test drug containing medium was added. The cells were then assayed for luminescence over a period of 96 hours in the BMG FLUOstar OPTIMA Microplate Reader to observe the periodicity and amplitude of the luminescence values.

**STAR-PROM Assay**

This was conducted as previously reported in Gerber et al., Cell. 2013 Jan. 31; 152(3):492-503. Briefly, U2OS cells were cultured in 6-well plates and transfected with 1 ug of the STAR-PROM plasmid library (library structure as in above reference). RNA was extracted at set time points and sequenced for the barcoded luciferase constructs and analysed with Galaxy (https://use.galaxy.org).

**CRE-Luc Vector Transfection**

At 60-80% confluence and >90% viability, the U2OS cells in the T-75 flask were washed twice with 6 ml phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and subsequently treated with 4 ml of TrypLE™ Express trypsin replacement solution for 10 minutes. A Greiner Bio-One 96 Well Plate (white, TC treated), was then seeded at 8000 cells per well. Following 24 hours, the cells were transfected at 50-70% confluency with CRE-luc Vector generated in-house with Viafect transfection reagent at 1:4 ratio (100 ng DNA/well) following manufacturers recommendations.

**CRE-Luc Luciferase Assay**

24 hours after transfection, the medium in the 96 well plate was changed to a serum-free medium with 1 mM luciferin. The cells were then incubated in serum starvation conditions for 6-8 hours, this was optimised to yield the greatest signal strength and lowest noise when assayed with forskolin control. Following the incubation period, the CRE-Luc U2OS cells were treated with the appropriate drug and their luminescence values were measured after 6 hours in the BMG FLUOstar OPTIMA Microplate Reader. For comparative experiments, drug concentrations of 10 μM were used as they were found to be optimal for keeping cell toxicity below 5%, measured with the Presto Blue exclusion assay. Unless stated otherwise, forskolin was used as a positive control, and 1% DMSO was used as a negative control.

cAMP GloSensor Assay

The GloSensor™ cAMP Assay (Promega) was used for detecting changes in the intracellular levels of cAMP. Initially, a Greiner Bio-One 96 Well Plate (white, TC treated) was seeded at 8000 cells per 100 μl well, as described above. After 24 hours, the cells were transfected with the pGloSensor™ cAMP Plasmid using the Viafect transfection reagent as above. Between 24 and 48 hours later, allowing for the accumulation of the biosensor, the medium in the 96 well plate was changed to C02-Independent Medium supplemented with GlutaMAX™ (Life Technologies), 10% fetal bovine serum and 2% GloSensor™ cAMP Reagent. The plate was then stood for 2 hours at room temperature to equilibrate. Following the incubation period, the cells were treated with relevant drugs and their luminescence values were measured after 20 minutes in the BMG FLUOstar OPTIMA Microplate Reader, with forskolin as a positive control, and DMSO as a negative control.

### Statistics

Statistical analyses and dose-response curves were performed by the use of Graph Pad Prism 5.0 software. Two-tailed Student's t-test was used to calculate the P values for unpaired, homoscedastic comparisons, with the P values <0.05 being considered statistically significant. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001. ANOVAs were used to perform multiple comparisons. Error bars on the graphs indicate one standard error of the mean (SEM). In addition, all results are presented in the form of average±SEM.

## Results and Discussion

### Adenosine Receptor Agonists Activate Gene Clock Expression in U2OS Cells

U2OS cell lines treated with the adenosine receptor agonist IB-MECA show increases in period and amplitude of the cellular clock as reported by the Per2::Luciferase construct (FIG. 1A). In addition to a dose dependent increase in circadian period, IB-MECA caused a concurrent increase in the second messenger cyclic AMP (cAMP) levels (FIG. 1B) and activation of the cAMP response element-binding factor (CREB) as indicated by the CRE::Luc reporter construct (FIG. 1C). These experiments were repeated with other adenosine receptor agonists (1-5 as detailed in FIGS. 1D and E) and similar increases in cAMP levels and CRE::Luc were observed (FIGS. 1D and 1E). IB-MECA induced dose-dependent period length increases (FIG. 1F) resulting rapid expression of the clock genes Per1/2 expression (FIG. 1H). Similar increases in period length were observed with BAY606583 (FIG. 1G).

### Adenosine Receptor Agonists Phase Shift Circadian Rhythms and Modulate the Effect of Light on the Central Circadian Clock

C57Bl/6 male mice (80+ days) were housed in a 12 h-light 12 h-dark cycle (400 lux). Stable entrainment was indicated by the onset of activity (green) during the dark part of the cycle (grey). Animals were administered Vehicle (FIG. 2A) or IB-MECA, 1 mg/kg intra-peritonially (FIG. 2B) followed by a light pulse at ZT22 (indicated by the arrow, 22 h after the onset of light). The results shown in FIG. 2A demonstrate that a light pulse at CT22 normally induced a phase advance, indicated by the advance in activity (point of intersection of the two black lines is advanced) after the animals were housed in constant dark (grey). Results shown in FIG. 2B show that the phase advance was lost when IB-MECA was administered (point of intersection of the black lines remains at the day at which the animals were released into DD, indicating no phase shift). Data summarized in (FIG. 2C). Results shown in FIG. 2D demonstrate that in the absence of a light pulse, IB-MECA elicited a phase delay when administered at CT22, whilst the vehicle and antagonist induced no significant change in phase.

### Adenosine Receptor Antagonists Modulate Circadian Rhythms and Clock Gene Expression in U2OS Cells.

As the adenosine receptor agonists activated the circadian gene Per1/2 expression, we hypothesised these effects were as a result of adenosine receptor activation. By extension we anticipated these effects to be blocked by the pan-adenosine receptor antagonist CGS15943(9-chloro-2-(furan-2-yl)-[1,2,4]triazolo[1,5-c]quinazolin-5-amine). However, multiple adenosine receptor antagonists Istradefylline, JNJ40255293, MRS1220 and ZM241385 surprisingly and unexpectedly increased circadian period length in a dose dependent manner (FIGS. 3A-3G)). FIG. 3A shows that period lengthening was observed in Per2::Luc U2OS cells treated with JNJ40255293 (the time of application being indicated by the arrow and doses as indicated). As the cAMP could have increased as a consequence of antagonising A1 receptor (Gi coupled), the alterations in cAMP as a consequence of A1 receptor blockade in U2OS cells was evaluated. Results shown in FIGS. 3B and 3C demonstrate that none of the adenosine receptor antagonists increased the intracellular cAMP or CREB activation in U2OS cells. However, dose responsive period lengthening was observed as shown in FIGS. 3D-H in JNJ40255293, istradefylline, MRS1220 and ZM241385-treated U2OS cells respectively. In order to verify that the observed effects were due to action on adenosine receptors, the A1, A2A, A2B adenosine receptors in U2OS cells were knocked down using siRNA and the effects of the antagonists were evaluated. FIG. 3H, shows the effects of the antagonists were was abolished confirming that the observed effect on period is indeed through action on adenosine receptors.

The absence of the CRE::Luc response indicates an alternative transcriptional pathway culminating in clock gene expression. To identify this pathway, STAR-PROM screening was conducted (as described in Gerber et al., 2013, Cell and in collaboration with Prof. Ulrich Schibler, Geneva). This system comprises a library of synthetic promoter elements driving luciferase expression and can be used to identify new transcriptional elements activated by drugs or treatments. JNJ40255293 activated the expression of several reporter constructs as highlighted by the grey box in FIG. 3I.

Results shown in FIGS. 3J and 3K show that Per1 and Per2 mRNA levels respectively were elevated after JNJ40255293 application (30 uM) in U2OS cells.

### Adenosine Receptor Antagonists Phase Shift Circadian Rhythms and Enhance Entrainment in a Jet-Lag Protocol

C57B/6 male mice (80+ days) were housed in a 12 h-light 12 h-dark cycle (400 lux). Stable entrainment was indicated by the onset of activity (black) during the dark part of the cycle (grey). Animals were administered Vehicle (FIG. 4A) or JNJ40255293, 5 mg/kg intraperitonial injection (FIG. 4B) (indicated by the arrow, 6 h after the onset of light). JNJ40255293 induced a phase advance, indicated by the advance in activity (diagonal line) after the animals were housed in constant dark (grey). Data summarized in (C). Similarly, JNJ40255293 was administered at CT16 (circadian time 16 or 16 h after the onset of light) and resulted in a phase delay, indicating the same drug would have different effects on circadian phase at different times, similar to light (FIG. 4E). The same protocol as above was followed as for FIGS. 4A and 4B, with the exception that rather than a release of the animals into constant dark after drug administrations, the light-dark cycle was advanced 6 h to simulate an eastward flight and an advance of 6 time zones. The vehicle treated animals (FIG. 4E) advanced their activity gradually each day, and in contrast the JNJ40255293 treated animals (FIG. 4F) shifted rapidly. The results shown in FIG. 4G show enhancement of re-entrainment was observed for both JNJ40255293 (FIG. 4G). Results shown in FIGS. 4H and 4I show that Per1 and Per2 mRNA levels respectively were elevated within the SCN after administration of JNJ40255293 in the periphery (intra-peritonially), indicating the drug's central effect. Results shown in FIGS. 4J and 4K are from experiments were animals were housed in constant dark and at CT16 or 4 hours after subjective dusk received either vehicle or 5 mg/kg JNJ40255293 or 1 mg/kg IB-MECA (data not shown) and onsets of activity measured. Phase shifts were measured by the difference between the two measures of onset (pre and post injection) and plotted. JNJ40255293 at this time causes a phase delay.

### Adenosine Receptor Antagonists/Inverse Agonists Regulate Cellular Clocks Via a Novel Signalling Pathway.

FIGS. 5A-5E and 6A to 6H detail the effect of adenosine receptor antagonists on the cellular clock. Whilst we expected the opposite from antagonists than the agonists, we were surprised to find that antagonists of A1/A2A receptors such as JNJ40255293 produced large dose-dependent increases in period length. We observed little if any increases in cAMP (50% increase at 30 uM), certainly not to the levels required to elicit changes in circadian period. Correspondingly, we saw no changes in CREB phosphorylation or signal for CRE::Luc reporters, but observed significantly increased Per1/2 transcription at 4 h post-drug treatment (thus with a significantly different time course as the agonists) and changes in period length. These findings implicate a novel CREB-independent transcriptional axis downstream of adenosine receptors that causes a delayed induction Per1/2 transcription. Mixed A1/A2A antagonists achieved this effect (e.g. JNJ40255293) but neither A1 specific not A2A/A2B specific antagonists were able to replicate this effect. In order to identify the novel transcriptional axis downstream of A1/A2A antagonism that converged on the clock, we employed the unbiased transcription factor screening approach BC-STARPROM/30 uM JNJ40255293 significantly increased the reporter signal from 8 clones, 7 of which were predicted to contain Fos-related transcription factor binding site. We isolated clone3, which we found responded to a panel of different antagonists including JNJ40255293. The DNA sequence containing the promoter region of clone 3 was used to pull down protein binding partners from a nuclear extract of cells treated with JNJ40255293 and the isolated proteins sequenced using mass spectrometry. A few transcription factors were enriched in the CGS-treated samples, including JunD and Fosl2. Correspondingly, siRNA-mediated silencing of Fos significantly reduced the response of clone3 to CGS15943. Analysis of the Per1 and Per2 promoters revealed conserved Fos:Jun binding site within their promoters (data not shown).

FIG. 5: (A) JNJ40255293 does not elevate cAMP levels in U2OS cells or (B) increase phosphorylation of CREB, in contrast to the positive controls Forskolin of IB-MECA. (C) Robust increases in Per1 and Per2 mRNA are seen after treatment with 10 uM JNJ40255293, leading to (D) increases in period length in Bmal1::Luc reporter U2OS cells which revert to normal rhythms after washout of drug. (E) Dose-responsive increases in period length are observed. FIG. 6A to H show that multiple adenosine receptor antagonists perturb circadian rhythms in U2OS cells in a CREB-independent manner.

The STAR-PROM Approach Reveals a Novel Signalling Pathway Downstream of Adenosine Receptor Inhibition that Converges on the Circadian Clock.

This is demonstrated in FIGS. 7A to 7E and 3. FIG. 7C shows the activity of Seq3 after knockdown of Fos (siFos) when compared with a non-targeting siRNA (siNT) and induction by JNJ40255293 compared with DMSO. This demonstrates an alternate pathway leading from the mixed antagonists to Per1/2. The specific expression of one reporter that contains the same transcriptional binding element as found in Per2. The upper line represents the induction of expression of the clone on treatment with JNJ40255293 and the lower lines represent the same after silencing of the candidate transcription factor AP1 (consisting of the subunits Fos and Jun). These data confirm that AP1 is responsible for the transcription of Per1/2 after treatment with JNJ40255293.

### The SCN Expresses Adenosine Receptors and is Sensitive to Adenosine Receptor Antagonists/Inverse Agonists.

We then extended our work to the central pacemaker and found that JNJ40255293 increased period length in isolated Per2::Luc SCN slice cultures. Intraperitoneal injections of JNJ40255293 increased Per1 and Per2 expression. FIG. 8A to C depicts these results.

### Circadian Behavioural Assays Show Efficacy of A1/A2A Dual Antagonists at Modifying Circadian Rhythms.

FIG. 9 A to C show graphs that represent the speed of entrainment of mice treated a single intraperitoneal injection of the drugs JNJ40255293 (5 mg/kg), Tasimelteon (5 mg/kg) KW6002 (1 mg/kg) and KW3902 (1 mg/kg). The light dark cycle was advanced by six hours after the injection at ZT6 and the phase of onset of activity (marking circadian time in the animals) was plotted. Vehicle treated animals typically took 5-6 days to return to baseline, while JNJ40255293 clearly advanced entrainment more potently than Tasimelteon, KW6002 (specific A2A antagonist) or KW3902 (specific A1 antagonist).

### Adenosine Signalling Regulates the Sensitivity of the Circadian Clock to Light.

We investigated the physiological relevance of our findings to the sleep axis. We predicted that sleep deprivation would increase levels of extracellular adenosine and that this would decrease clock gene expression. We found that as predicted, sleep deprivation decreases Per1/2 expression within the SCN, consistent with increased adenosine-A signalling and that this decrease was reversed by administration of JNJ40255293 and mimicked by administration of an A1 agonist. An A2A specific agonist CGS21680 had the opposite effect and increased Per1/2 expression (data not shown). We also found as previously reported, that sleep deprivation increased Per1/2 within the cortex, and that this increase was more due to the stress-glucocorticoid signalling axis as administration of mifepristone blunted this response (data not shown). The implication of these findings is that adenosine levels (presumably influenced by sleep history) can influence circadian responses. We tested this in the context of circadian-phase shifts to light. We hypothesised that A1 antagonists would enhance the effects of light, whereas A1 agonists would inhibit the phase-shifting effect of light. This is indeed what we found, that we were able to alter the depths of the two arms of the light PRC by modulating adenosine signalling. The implications of this finding could explain the different light PRCs in nocturnal versus diurnal animals

The data in FIG. 10 A to 10 C shows that sleep deprivation paradoxically increases Per2 expression within the cortex. Individual actograms (10B) supports the assertion that adenosine signalling regulates the sensitivity of the circadian clock to light. 10C shows that the A1/A2A antagonist JNJ40255293 also enhances phase-shifts in response to light at CT16, unlike the non-specific agonist IB-MECA.

The experiments detailed in FIGS. 1-10 describe the effect of adenosine receptor modulators and adenosine signalling on circadian clock function. Through both canonical (CREB-based) and novel pathways, drugs targeting the adenosine receptor system activate clock gene expression and provide a zeitgeber or time-giving message to the circadian clock. This can be used to reset, i.e. to advance or delay the phase and period of the circadian clock in vitro and also in vivo. These results support the use of adenosine receptor modulators as chronomodulatory compounds, particularly where at least two adenosine receptors are modulated in tandem.

All documents mentioned herein are incorporated by reference.

Other embodiments are intentionally within the scope of the invention as defined by the appended claims.

