# DESCRIPTION

## FIELD OF THE INVENTION

The present invention relates to compounds and compositions for controlling mosquitoes, and methods of making and using thereof.

## BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

Developing new strategies for vector control is becoming increasingly important as worldwide cases of Aedes aegypti-transmitted dengue and Zika virus infections have risen dramatically in the last decade (Murray, et al., Clin Epidemiol 5:299-309 (2013), Bhatt S, et al. Nature 496(7446):504-507 (2013), Fauci, et al., N Engl J Med 374(7):601-604 (2016)). Metabolic regulation of blood meal metabolism in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes is being investigated as a strategy for identifying new protein targets that could be exploited for vector control (Isoe, et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 108(24):E211-217 (2011), Isoe, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol, 39(12):903-912 (2009), Scaraffia, et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 105(2):518-523 (2008), Brandon, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol, 38(10):916-922 (2008), Alabaster, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol, 41(12):946-55 (2011), Rascon, et al., BMC Biochem, 12:43 (2011), Zhou, et al., PLoS One, 6(3):e18150 (2011), Isoe, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol, 43(8):732-739 (2013), Isoe, et al., PLoS One, 8(6):e65393 (2013), Mazzalupo, et al., FASEB J, 30(1):111-120 (2016), Isoe, et al., FASEB J, 31(6):2276-2286 (2017)). The approach has focused on biochemical processes that are likely to be required for completion of the gonotrophic cycle in blood-fed mosquitoes based on what is known about mosquito biology and metabolic regulation in other organisms. Specific genes in these chosen pathways were then systematically knocked down by microinjection of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), and the resulting phenotypes were characterized in detail by molecular and biochemical approaches.

Other strategies for vector control include use of devices for the capture, detection, and control of insect vectors such as autocidal gravid ovitraps (see e.g., U.S. Pat. No. 9,237,741) and methods for artificially infecting mosquitoes to control the reproduction capability of the population (see e.g., U.S. Pat. No. 7,868,222). See also Pates H. and Curtis C., Annu Rev Entomol., 50:53-70 (2005); Benelli G. and Mehlhorn H., Parasitol Res., 115(5):1747-54 (2016); and Benelli G., Parasitol Res., 114(8):2801-5 (2015).

The insect eggshell is important as a protective layer for embryonic development. Follicle development and eggshell formation in the Ae. aegypti mosquito are tightly regulated in response to blood feeding (Hagedorn, et al., J Insect Physiol 23(2):203-206 (1977), Lea, et al., Physiol Entomol 3(4):309-316 (1978), Clements, et al., Physiol Entomol 9(1):1-8 (1984), Raikhel, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol 32(10):1275-1286 (2002), Uchida, et al., J Insect Physiol 50(10):903-912 (2004), Clifton, et al., J Insect Physiol 57(9):1274-1281 (2011)). Once female mosquitoes acquire blood, follicle development is initiated via accumulation of vitellogenin yolk proteins. Mosquitoes contain ˜100 ovarioles per ovary, which are composed of primary and secondary follicles and a germarium, and the ovarian follicles develop synchronously throughout oogenesis. A single layer of follicular epithelial cells surrounding the oocyte is mainly responsible for secreting a majority of eggshell structural components. The mosquito eggshell is made from different types of proteins including structural proteins, enzymes, odorant binding proteins, uncharacterized proteins of unknown function. Ae. aegypti eggshell melanization proteins were identified more than 20 years ago (Li, et al., Comp Biochem Physiol 109(4):835-843 (1994)), and several key eggshell enzymes have been well characterized (Ferdig, et. al., Insect Mol Biol 5(2):119-126 (1996), Han, et al., Arch Biochem Biophys 378(1):107-115 (2000), Johnson, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol, 31(11):1125-1135 (2001), Fang, et al., Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002, 290(1):287-293 (2002), Kim, et al., Insect Mol Biol 14(2):185-194 (2005), Li, et al., Protein Sci 14(9):2370-2386 (2005), Li, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol 36(12):954-964 (2006)). Moreover, proteomic studies have been performed on purified mosquito eggshells to identify most of the abundant protein components (Amenya, et al., J Insect Physiol, 56(10):1414-1419 (2010), Marinotti, et al., BMC Dev Biol 2014, 14:15 (2014)). However, these descriptive studies have not identified essential eggshell proteins that are required for embryonic development.

Genomic sequences of Drosophila melanogaster (Adams, et al., Science 287(5461):2185-2195 (2000)), Anopheles gambiae (Holt, et al., Science 298(5591):129-149 (2002)), Ae. aegypti (Nene, et al., Science 316(5832):1718-1723 (2007)), and Culex quinquefasciatus (Arensburger, et al., Science 330(6000):86-88) have been completed. Many predicted putative proteins identified in the genome of mosquitoes are homologous to proteins of known function studied in other organisms. Proteins that are conserved in a wide variety of organisms are not ideal target molecules as vector control agents because of deleterious effects on non-target organisms, such as vertebrates, pollinating agricultural insects, and beneficial predators.

Mosquito-borne pathogens infect millions of people worldwide, and increasing insecticide resistance exacerbates this problem. A new generation of environmentally safe insecticides will be important to control insecticide-resistant mosquitoes (Marinotti, et al., Anopheles stephensi. Malar J. 12:142 (2011). As such, there is a growing demand for the identification of important proteins responsible for mosquito reproduction.

Thus, it is an object of the invention to provide compositions and methods for identifying mosquito-specific proteins important for embryonic development in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes, and compositions and methods for reducing expression or activity of these proteins in mosquitoes.

## SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

Compositions and methods for reducing or preventing mosquito embryos from completing embryogenesis and/or reaching the first larval instar, reducing, delaying, or otherwise disrupting eggshell formation and/or egg melanization, reducing egg survival, altering the follicular shape of eggs, increasing permeability of oocytes to water, reducing female fecundity, increasing an embryonic lethal phenotype, or any combination thereof are provided. The compositions can, for example, include an effective amount of a compound or compounds that reduces, inhibits, or prevents expression or activity of an eggshell formation, melanization, and/or crosslinking pathway having a mosquito Eggshell Organizing Factor 1 (EOF1) protein therein. In some embodiments, the pathway further includes one or more proteins selected from Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and DCE5 therein.

Typically, the compositions include an effective amount of a compound that reduces, inhibits, or prevents expression and/or activity of a mosquito target gene selected from Eggshell Organizing Factor 1 (EOF1), Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and DCE5, or a combination, or a gene product thereof, for example EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 mRNA or EOF1 Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 protein. In preferred embodiments, the compound reduces, inhibits, or prevents expression and/or activity of a mosquito target gene selected from the group consisting of Eggshell Organizing Factor 1 (EOF1), Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, or Nudel, or a gene product thereof.

The EOF1 gene can, for example, encode the protein AAEL012336 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT35499), or a homologous protein from another species of mosquito with at least 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 96, 97, 98, or 99 percent sequence identity to the protein AAEL012336 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT35499).

The Nasrat gene can, for example, encode the protein AAEL008829 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT39370), or a homologous protein from another species of mosquito with at least 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99 percent sequence identity to the protein AAEL008829 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT39370.

The Closca gene can, for example, encode the protein AAEL000961 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT47957), or a homologous protein of another species of mosquito with at least 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99 percent sequence identity to the protein AAEL000961 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT47957).

The Polehole gene can, for example, encode the protein AAEL022628 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT33906), or a homologous protein of another species of mosquito with at least 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99 percent sequence identity to the protein AAEL022628 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT33906).

The Nudel gene can, for example, encode the protein AAEL016971 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EJY57924), or a homologous protein of another species of mosquito with at least 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99 percent sequence identity to the protein AAEL016971 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EJY57924).

The CATL3 gene can, for example, encode the protein AAEL002196 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT46597), or a homologous protein of another species of mosquito with at least 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99 percent sequence identity to the protein AAEL002196 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT46597).

The DCE2 gene can, for example, encode the protein AAEL006830 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT41553), or a homologous protein of another species of mosquito with at least 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99 percent sequence identity to the protein AAEL006830 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT41553).

The DCE4 gene can, for example, encode the protein AAEL007096 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT41240), or a homologous protein of another species of mosquito with at least 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99 percent sequence identity to the protein AAEL007096 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT41240). The DCE5 gene can, for example, encode the protein AAEL010848 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT37145), or a homologous protein of another species of mosquito with at least 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99 percent sequence identity to the protein AAEL010848 (Aedes aegypti) (Genbank Accession number: EAT37145).

In some embodiments, the compound is a functional nucleic acid or a vector encoding a functional nucleic acid, or a gene editing composition or a vector encoding a gene editing composition. Functional nucleic acids include, for example, antisense molecules, siRNA, miRNA, ribozymes, RNAi, and external guide sequences. Exemplary gene editing compositions include, for example, CRISPR/Cas systems, Zinc Figure Nucleases, Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nucleases, triplex forming molecules, and donor oligonucleotides.

In some embodiments, the compound is a functional nucleic acid, particularly RNAi, e.g., double stranded RNAi, that targets an mRNA encoding the EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 protein (e.g., any one of SEQ ID NOS:1, 183-190, or 200-219, or a sequence at least 85%, 90%, or 95% identical thereto). In particular embodiments, the composition is a functional nucleic acid, particularly RNAi, e.g., double stranded RNAi, that targets the mRNA corresponding to or encoded by the DNA sequence of any one of SEQ ID NOS:191-199 or 220-247, or a sequence at least 85%, 90%, or 95% identical thereto.

It is believed that Nudel serine protease associates with the Nasrat, Closca, and Polehole structural proteins in a common pathway that is itself controlled by EOF1, and that protease inhibitors that target Nudel can be used to control mosquito populations. Thus, in some embodiments, the compound is a protease inhibitor such as, but not limited to, a protein, a peptide, or small molecule. In preferred embodiments, the inhibitor is specific for a mosquito nude1. In some embodiments, the inhibitor is specific for A. aegypti mosquito nude1.

In some embodiments, the composition includes a biotic or abiotic system that mediates protection and/or uptake of the compound. For example, in some embodiments, the compound is expressed by a viral expression system, bacterial expression system, or yeast expression system. In some embodiments, the compound is encapsulated or dispersed in nanoparticles or microparticles. The particles can be, for example, polymeric or liposomal. The composition can include a carrier optionally including one or more additional inert ingredients.

The disclosed methods typically include contacting mosquito cells with an effective amount of one or more of the disclosed compositions. The mosquito cells are typically contacted in vivo in one or more adult, larvae, pupae, or embryonic mosquitoes. In some embodiments, the composition is administered in a manner suitable to reduce, inhibit, or prevent expression of the EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and/or DCE5 gene or a gene product thereof at least a few days, for example 2 days, 3 days, 4 days, or 5 days, prior to blood feeding in the first and/or second gonotrophic cycles; one day, two days, three days, or more after oviposition; or a combination thereof of in adult female mosquitoes.

In some embodiments, the mosquitoes contact a surface, such as water or vegetation or bait, previously treated with the composition and thereby contact the composition. The composition can also be administered by impregnated bed nets, spraying, and/or direct application to a water source.

In some embodiments, expression of the EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 gene or a product thereof is reduced, inhibited, or prevented in an effective number of mosquitoes to reduce transmission of one or more infections or diseases such as West Nile Virus, La Crosse Encephalitis, Jamestown Canyon Virus, Western Equine Encephalitis, Eastern Equine Encephalitis, St. Louis Encephalitis, Chikungungya, Dengue Fever, Malaria, Yellow Fever, Zika Virus, or a combination thereof in, for example, humans.

Methods of identifying mosquito-specific target genes are also provided. The methods can include, for example, data mining and bioinformatic analysis to identify putative protein-coding and non-protein coding gene sequences that are only present in the genomes of one or more mosquitoes. In some embodiments, the cut-off for expected value threshold of, for example, about 1e-15 is used. The putative protein-coding gene sequences can be selected if a corresponding mRNA or orthologue thereof is present in a mosquito expressed sequence tag (EST) or expressed transcriptome shotgun assembly (TSA) database. In some embodiments, the gene sequences are further selected if they are not part of a multigene family, there is no corresponding homologue in one or more of phantom midges, true midges, crane fly, and sandflies within the suborder Nematocera, or a combination thereof.

Selected genes can be screened for activity. For example, functional nucleic acids designed to reduce, inhibit or prevent expression of the selected gene sequences or products thereof can be contacted with a mosquito. In some embodiments, the gene sequences are further selected when the functional nucleic acid causes a desirable phenotype in the mosquito. The desirable phenotype can be associated with, for example, morphogenesis, olfaction for host seeking, oviposition, blood feeding, digestion, reproduction, fertility, fecundity, embryogenesis, survival, insecticide resistance, larval development, pupal development, emergence, pathogen uptake, development, transmission, and combinations thereof.

Methods of identifying inhibitors of the disclosed proteins are also provided. In some embodiments, the protein is an enzyme, for example a mosquito Nudel, CATL3, and DCE2. The screen can include, for example, contacting a putative inhibitor with the enzyme in the presence and absence of a substrate of the enzyme, and selecting the putative inhibitor when activity of the enzyme's activity for the substrate is reduced in the presence of the inhibitor compared to the enzyme's activity for the substrate in the absence of the inhibitor. The steps can be repeated with a plurality of putative inhibitors. In some embodiments, the screen is a high throughput screen. The screen can be automated.

In some embodiments, the methods further include testing selected putative inhibitors in one or more in vitro or in vivo assay measuring eggshell formation, melanization, crosslinking or another egg development assay in mosquitoes. The putative inhibitor can be selected, for example, when it phenocopies an RNAi of one or more of EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5. In some embodiments, The method the putative has little or more phenotypic effect on mammals, other insects, or a combination thereof, or the cells or proteins thereof, in the same or similar assays.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION

### I. Definitions

As used herein, the term “isolated” describes a compound of interest (e.g., either a polynucleotide or a polypeptide) that is in an environment different from that in which the compound naturally occurs e.g. separated from its natural milieu such as by concentrating a peptide to a concentration at which it is not found in nature. “Isolated” includes compounds that are within samples that are substantially enriched for the compound of interest and/or in which the compound of interest is partially or substantially purified. With respect to nucleic acids, the term “isolated” includes any non-naturally-occurring nucleic acid sequence, since such non-naturally-occurring sequences are not found in nature and do not have immediately contiguous sequences in a naturally-occurring genome.

As used herein, the term “nucleic acid(s)” refers to any nucleic acid containing molecule, including, but not limited to, DNA or RNA. The term encompasses sequences that include any of the known base analogs of DNA and RNA including, but not limited to, 4-acetylcytosine, 8-hydroxy-N6-methyladenosine, aziridinylcytosine, pseudoisocytosine, 5-(carboxyhydroxylmethyl) uracil, 5-fluorouracil, 5-bromouracil, 5-carboxymethylaminomethyl-2-thiouracil, 5-carboxymethylaminomethyluracil, dihydrouracil, inosine, N6-isopentenyladenine, 1-methyladenine, 1-methylpseudouracil, 1-methylguanine, 1-methylinosine, 2,2-dimethylguanine, 2-methyladenine, 2-methylguanine, 3-methylcytosine, 5-methylcytosine, N6-methyladenine, 7-methylguanine, 5-methylaminomethyluracil, 5-methoxy-aminomethyl-2-thiouracil, beta-D-mannosylqueosine, 5′-methoxycarbonylmethyluracil, 5-methoxyuracil, 2-methylthio-N6-isopentenyladenine, uracil-5-oxyacetic acid methylester, uracil-5-oxyacetic acid, oxybutoxosine, pseudouracil, queosine, 2-thiocytosine, 5-methyl-2-thiouracil, 2-thiouracil, 4-thiouracil, 5-methyluracil, N-uracil-5-oxyacetic acid methylester, uracil-5-oxyacetic acid, pseudouracil, queosine, 2-thiocytosine, and 2,6-diaminopurine. In accordance with standard nomenclature, nucleic acid sequences are denominated by either a three letter, or single letter code as indicated as follows: adenine (Ade, A), thymine (Thy, T), guanine (Gua, G) cytosine (Cyt, C), uracil (Ura, U).

As used herein, the term “polynucleotide” refers to a chain of nucleotides of any length, regardless of modification (e.g., methylation).

As used herein, the term “gene” refers to a nucleic acid (e.g., DNA or RNA) sequence that including coding sequences necessary for the production of a polypeptide, RNA (e.g., including but not limited to, mRNA, tRNA and rRNA) or precursor. The polypeptide, RNA, or precursor can be encoded by a full length coding sequence or by any portion thereof. The term also encompasses the coding region of a structural gene and the sequences located adjacent to the coding region on both the 5′ and 3′ ends for a distance of about 1 kb on either end such that the gene corresponds to the length of the full-length mRNA. The term “gene” encompasses both cDNA and genomic forms of a gene, which may be made of DNA, or RNA. A genomic form or clone of a gene may contain the coding region interrupted with non-coding sequences termed “introns” or “intervening regions” or “intervening sequences.” Introns are segments of a gene that are transcribed into nuclear RNA (hnRNA); introns may contain regulatory elements such as enhancers. Introns are removed or “spliced out” from the nuclear or primary transcript; introns therefore are absent in the messenger RNA (mRNA) transcript. The mRNA functions during translation to specify the sequence or order of amino acids in a nascent polypeptide.

As used herein, the term “nucleic acid molecule encoding” refers to the order or sequence of nucleotides along a strand of nucleotides. The order of these nucleotides determines the order of amino acids along the polypeptide (protein) chain.

As used herein, “heterologous” means derived from a different species.

As used herein, “homologous” means derived from the same species. For example, a homologous trait is any characteristic of organisms that is derived from a common ancestor. Homologous sequences can be orthologous or paralogous. Homologous sequences are orthologous if they were separated by a speciation event: when a species diverges into two separate species, the divergent copies of a single gene in the resulting species are said to be orthologous. Orthologs, or orthologous genes, are genes in different species that are similar to each other because they originated from a common ancestor. Homologous sequences are paralogous if they were separated by a gene duplication event: if a gene in an organism is duplicated to occupy two different positions in the same genome, then the two copies are paralogous.

As used herein, “autologous” means derived from self.

As used herein, “endogenous” means a substance that originates from within an organism, tissue, or cell.

As used herein, “exogenous” means a substances that originates from outside an organism, tissue, or cell.

As used herein a “recombinant protein” is a protein derived from recombinant DNA.

As used herein “recombinant DNA” refers to a DNA molecule that is extracted from different sources and chemically joined together; for example DNA including a gene from one source may be recombined with DNA from another source. Recombinant DNA can be all heterologous DNA or a combination of homologous and heterologous DNA. The recombinant DNA can be integrated into and expressed from a cell's chromosome, or can be expressed for an extra-chromosomal array such as a plasmid.

As used herein, the term “polypeptides” includes proteins and fragments thereof. Polypeptides are disclosed herein as amino acid residue sequences. Those sequences are written left to right in the direction from the amino to the carboxy terminus. In accordance with standard nomenclature, amino acid residue sequences are denominated by either a three letter or a single letter code as indicated as follows: Alanine (Ala, A), Arginine (Arg, R), Asparagine (Asn, N), Aspartic Acid (Asp, D), Cysteine (Cys, C), Glutamine (Gln, Q), Glutamic Acid (Glu, E), Glycine (Gly, G), Histidine (His, H), Isoleucine (Ile, I), Leucine (Leu, L), Lysine (Lys, K), Methionine (Met, M), Phenylalanine (Phe, F), Proline (Pro, P), Serine (Ser, S), Threonine (Thr, T), Tryptophan (Trp, W), Tyrosine (Tyr, Y), and Valine (Val, V).

As used herein, a “variant,” “mutant,” or “mutated” polynucleotide or polypeptide contains at least one polynucleotide or polypeptide sequence alteration as compared to the polynucleotide or polypeptide sequence of the corresponding wild-type or parent polynucleotide or polypeptide. Mutations may be natural, deliberate, or accidental. Mutations include substitutions, deletions, and insertions.

As used herein, a “nucleic acid sequence alteration” can be, for example, a substitution, a deletion, or an insertion of one or more nucleotides. An “amino acid sequence alteration” can be, for example, a substitution, a deletion, or an insertion of one or more amino acids.

As used herein, “identity,” as known in the art, is a relationship between two or more polynucleotide or polypeptide sequences, as determined by comparing the sequences. In the art, “identity” also means the degree of sequence relatedness between the polynucleotide or polypeptide as determined by the match between strings of such sequences. “Identity” can also mean the degree of sequence relatedness of a polynucleotide or polypeptide compared to the full-length of a reference polynucleotide or polypeptide. “Identity” and “similarity” can be readily calculated by known methods, including, but not limited to, those described in (Computational Molecular Biology, Lesk, A. M., Ed., Oxford University Press, New York, 1988; Biocomputing: Informatics and Genome Projects, Smith, D. W., Ed., Academic Press, New York, 1993; Computer Analysis of Sequence Data, Part I, Griffin, A. M., and Griffin, H. G., Eds., Humana Press, New Jersey, 1994; Sequence Analysis in Molecular Biology, von Heinje, G., Academic Press, 1987; and Sequence Analysis Primer, Gribskov, M. and Devereux, J., Eds., M Stockton Press, New York, 1991; and Carillo, H., and Lipman, D., SIAM J Applied Math., 48: 1073 (1988).

Preferred methods to determine identity are designed to give the largest match between the sequences tested. Methods to determine identity and similarity are codified in publicly available computer programs. The percent identity between two sequences can be determined by using analysis software (i.e., Sequence Analysis Software Package of the Genetics Computer Group, Madison Wis.) that incorporates the Needelman and Wunsch, (J. Mol. Biol., 48: 443-453, 1970) algorithm (e.g., NBLAST, and XBLAST). The default parameters are used to determine the identity for the polynucleotides or polypeptides of the present disclosure.

By way of example, a polynucleotide or polypeptide sequence may be identical to the reference sequence, that is be 100% identical, or it may include up to a certain integer number of nucleotides or amino acid alterations as compared to the reference sequence such that the % identity is less than 100%. Such alterations are selected from: at least one deletion, substitution, including conservative and non-conservative substitution, or insertion, and wherein said alterations may occur at the 5′ or 3′ end of the polynucleotide, or amino- or carboxy-terminal positions of the reference polypeptide sequence or anywhere between those terminal positions, interspersed either individually among the nucleic acids or amino acids in the reference sequence or in one or more contiguous groups within the reference sequence. The number of nucleotide or amino acid alterations for a given % identity is determined by multiplying the total number of nucleic acids or amino acids in the reference polynucleotide or polypeptide by the numerical percent of the respective percent identity (divided by 100) and then subtracting that product from said total number of nucleic acids or amino acids in the reference polynucleotide or polypeptide.

As used herein, “operably linked” refers to a juxtaposition wherein the components are configured so as to perform their usual function. For example, control sequences or promoters operably linked to a coding sequence are capable of effecting the expression of the coding sequence, and an organelle localization sequence operably linked to protein will assist the linked protein to be localized at the specific organelle.

As used herein, the term “effective amount” means a dosage sufficient to provide a desired physiologic or phenotypic effect.

As used herein, the phrase “gene editing composition(s)” refers to a group of technologies that give the practitioner the ability to change an organism's DNA. These compositions allow genetic material to be added, removed, or altered at particular locations in the genome.

As used herein, the term “small molecule” generally refers to an organic molecule that is less than about 2000 g/mol in molecular weight, less than about 1500 g/mol, less than about 1000 g/mol, less than about 800 g/mol, or less than about 500 g/mol. Small molecules are non-polymeric and/or non-oligomeric.

### II. Compositions

Female mosquitoes feed on blood to produce eggs, which are covered with eggshell. It has been discovered that EOF1 protein plays an important role in eggshell melanization and embryonic development. As discussed in the Examples below, nearly 100% of eggs oviposited by EOF1-deficient females had defective eggshell and non-viable egg phenotypes. It is believed that EOF1 has evolved within the Culicidae to affect eggshell formation and therefore maximize egg survival. Compositions and methods for directly and indirectly reducing, inhibiting, or otherwise interfering with an EOF1 gene or a gene product thereof are provided. In some embodiments, the inhibitors directly or indirectly reduce bioactivity, expression, location, activity, or a combination thereof of the EOF1 gene, mRNA, protein, or a combination thereof. In some embodiments, the compound is an inhibitory polypeptide; peptidomimetic; an inhibitory nucleic acid that targets genomic or expressed EOF1 nucleic acids or a vector that encodes a functional nucleic acid such as an inhibitory nucleic acid; or a gene editing composition or vector encoding a gene editing composition. The inhibitor can reduce the expression or bioavailability of a gene product of an EOF1 gene. Inhibition can be competitive, non-competitive, uncompetitive, or product inhibition. Thus, an inhibitor can directly inhibit EOF1, can inhibit another factor in a pathway that leads to induction, persistence, or amplification of EOF1 expression and/or activity, or a combination thereof.

It has also been discovered that other proteins play an important role in eggshell melanization and embryonic development. SDS PAGE analysis demonstrated that eggshells produced by EOF1 deficient mosquitoes lack certain high molecular weight proteins (over 200 kD) compared to eggshells produced by control mosquitoes. As shown in the Examples below, it was observed that RNAi against high molecular weight eggshell proteins Nasrat, Closca, Polehole and Nude1 resulted in significant loss of egg melanization and embryo viability, which are similar phenotypes observed in EOF1-deficient eggs. RNAi knockdown of CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and DCE5 in Aedes aegypti also resulted in an egg phenotype.

Thus, also provided are compositions and methods for directly and indirectly reducing, inhibiting, or otherwise interfering with a Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 gene or a gene product thereof. In some embodiments, the inhibitors directly or indirectly reduce bioactivity, expression, location, activity, or a combination thereof of the Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 gene, mRNA, protein, or a combination thereof. In some embodiments, the compound is an inhibitory polypeptide; peptidomimetic; an inhibitory nucleic acid that targets genomic or expressed Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 nucleic acids or a vector that encodes a functional nucleic acid such as an inhibitory nucleic acid; or a gene editing composition or vector encoding a gene editing composition. The compound can reduce the expression or bioavailability of a gene product of a Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 gene, or combinations thereof. Inhibition can be competitive, non-competitive, uncompetitive, or product inhibition. Thus, an inhibitor can directly inhibit Nasrat, Closca, Polehole Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and/or DCE5, can inhibit another factor in a pathway that leads to induction, persistence, or amplification of Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and/or DCE5 expression and/or activity, or a combination thereof.

Typically the inhibitor is a compound that targets a EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 gene or gene product thereof and reduces its expression, activity, or bioavailability. Exemplary EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and DCE5 targets, exemplary functional nucleic acids and gene editing compositions, small molecule inhibitors, and methods of use thereof are provided in more detail below.

A. Exemplary EOF1 Genes and Gene Products

The Examples below show that a putative Aedes aegypti protein referred to herein as EOF1 (also referred to herein and elsewhere as AAEL012336) is important for egg formation, egg melanization, and egg survival. Protein and nucleic acid sequences, and genomic mapping of the EOF1 gene, are known in the art for numerous species of mosquitoes. See, for example, Genbank accession numbers: EAT35499 (Aedes aegypti); XP_019565035 and AALF011550 (Aedes albopictus); and XP_001870696 and CPIJ010293 (Culex quinquefasciatus), and other in Table 1, the contents of all of which are specifically incorporated by reference in their entirety.

For example, the amino acid sequence of Aedes aegypti EOF1 is

A nucleic acid sequence for EOF1 is

Thus, in some embodiments, the EOF1 gene or gene product that is subject to inhibition has at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, 99%, or 100% sequence identity with SEQ ID NO:1, or a nucleic acid sequence encoding SEQ ID NO:1, for example SEQ ID NO:191 or 239.

The EOF1 genes and proteins, or a homologue thereof, such as an orthologue or a paralogue, from other species of mosquito can be identified using, for example, BLASTN and/or BLASTP queries and/or sequence alignment techniques for global comparison. Exemplary species of mosquitoes that can be targeted are discussed in more detail below, and thus the EOF1 or homologue thereof can be from any of these species.

The sequences of any of the accession numbers disclosed herein can be used as query sequences to identify homologues and other related sequences. In some embodiments, a putative EOF1 protein, gene, or mRNA has at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, 99%, or 100% sequence identity with the sequences of any of the accession numbers disclosed herein, such as EAT35499, and including nucleic acid sequences encoding amino acid sequences thereof. Preferably the sequence identity is over at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, 99%, or 100% of the length of the query sequence. Thus, in some embodiments, the EOF1 gene or gene product that is subject to inhibition has at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, 99%, or 100% sequence identity with the sequence of any of the EOF1 accession numbers disclosed herein, and including the amino acid sequence where the nucleic acid sequence is provided and the nucleic acid sequence where the amino acid sequence is provided.

B. Exemplary Other Target Genes and Gene Products

The Examples below show that the Aedes aegypti proteins Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, and Nude1 are important for egg melanization, egg survival and oocyte membrane permeability.

RNAi knockdown of CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and DCE5 in Aedes aegypti, discussed in more detail in the experiments described below, also resulted in an egg phenotype. More specifically,

CATL3: RNAi-CATL3 gravid females were not able to lay majority eggs on wet oviposition substrate. However, they laid eggs on water surface. A nearly 100% eggs were defective for a shape and viability.

DCE2: RNAi-CATL3 gravid females laid eggs that contain incompletely melanized eggshell.

DCE4: RNAi-DCE4 gravid females laid nearly all viable eggs. However, all eggs have a defective exochorion structure which is important for substrate attachment in nature.

DCE5: Nearly identical phenotypes are observed from those eggs laid by RNAi-DCE5 gravid females as was observed for RNAi-DCE4 and described above.

Protein and nucleic acid sequences, and genomic mapping of these genes are known in the art for various species of mosquitoes. See, for example, Vectorbase and Genbank accession numbers provided in Table 1, the contents of each of which are specifically incorporated by reference in their entirety.

Thus, in some embodiments, the gene or gene product that is subject to inhibition has at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, 99%, or 100% sequence identity with any of the protein sequences disclosed in Table 1 (e.g., SEQ ID NOs:1, 183-190, and 200-219), or a nucleic acid sequence encoding any of the nucleic acid sequences disclosed in Table 1 (e.g., SEQ ID NOS:191-199 or 220-247).

For example, the amino acid sequence of Aedes aegypti Nasrat is

A nucleic acid sequence for Aedes aegypti Nasrat is

For example, the amino acid sequence of Aedes aegypti Closca is

A nucleic acid sequence for Aedes aegypti Closca is

For example, the amino acid sequence of Aedes aegypti Polehole is

A nucleic acid sequence for Aedes aegypti Polehole is

For example, the amino acid sequence of Aedes aegypti Nude1 is

A nucleic acid sequence for Aedes aegypti Nude1 is

For example, an amino acid sequence of Aedes aegypti CATL3 can be

An amino acid sequence of Aedes aegypti CATL3 can also be

A nucleic acid sequence for Aedes aegypti CATL3 is

For example, the amino acid sequence of Aedes aegypti DCE2 is

A nucleic acid sequence for Aedes aegypti DCE2 is

For example, the amino acid sequence of Aedes aegypti DCE4 is

A nucleic acid sequence for Aedes aegypti DCE4 is

For example, the amino acid sequence of Aedes aegypti DCE5 is

A nucleic acid sequence for Aedes aegypti DCE5 is

For any of the disclosed genes and proteins (e.g., Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, DCE5), or a homologue thereof, such as an orthologue or a paralogue, from other species of mosquito can be identified using, for example, BLASTN and/or BLASTP queries and/or sequence alignment techniques for global comparison. Exemplary species of mosquitoes that can be targeted are discussed in more detail below, and thus the Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, DCE5 or homologue thereof can be from any of these species.

Vectorbank and Genbank accession numbers, and sequence identifiers for EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and DCE5 protein and nucleic acid sequences in various species of mosquitoes are provided in Table 1, below. All the Vectorbank and Genbank accession numbers, including all sequences they provide, in Table 1 and provided elsewhere herein are specifically incorporated by reference herein in their entireties.

The sequences of any of the accession numbers disclosed herein can be used as query sequences to identify homologues and other related sequences. In some embodiments, a putative EOF 1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 has at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, 99%, or 100% sequence identity with the sequences of any of the accession numbers or sequence identifiers disclosed in Table 1, and including nucleic acid sequences encoding amino acid sequences thereof. Preferably the sequence identity is over at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, 99%, or 100% of the length of the query sequence. Thus, in some embodiments, the EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 gene or gene product that is subject to inhibition has at least 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, 99%, or 100% sequence identity with the sequence of any of the accession numbers or sequence identifiers disclosed in Table 1, and including the amino acid sequence where the nucleic acid sequence is provided and the nucleic acid sequence where the amino acid sequence is provided.

B. Inhibitors of Target Genes/Gene Products

The disclosed inhibitors of target genes/gene products such as EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 are typically functional nucleic acids or a gene editing composition. Functional nucleic acids are nucleic acid molecules that have a specific function, such as binding a target molecule or catalyzing a specific reaction. As discussed in more detail below, functional nucleic acid molecules can be divided into the following non-limiting categories: antisense molecules, siRNA, miRNA, ribozymes, RNAi, external guide sequences, RNA interference. Gene editing compositions facilitate a change in an organism's DNA. Gene editing compositions include, for example, CRISPR/Cas and other nuclease-based systems as well as triplex forming molecules and donor oligonucleotides.

The EOF1 inhibitor compounds can act as effectors, inhibitors, modulators, and stimulators of a specific activity possessed by a target molecule, or the functional nucleic acid molecules can possess a de novo activity independent of any other molecules. The compounds may interact with any macromolecule, such as DNA, RNA, polypeptides, or carbohydrate chains. Thus, compounds can interact with the mRNA or the genomic DNA of a target polypeptide or they can interact with the polypeptide itself. Often the compounds are designed to interact with other nucleic acids based on sequence homology between the target molecule and the compound. In other situations, the specific recognition between the EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 inhibitor compound and the target molecule is not based on sequence homology between the compound and the target molecule, but rather is based on the formation of tertiary structure that allows specific recognition to take place.

Therefore the compositions can include one or more functional nucleic acids or gene editing compositions designed to reduce expression of an EOF1 gene, or a gene product thereof. The compositions can include one or more functional nucleic acids or gene editing compositions designed to reduce expression of a Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 gene, or a gene product thereof. In preferred embodiments, the compositions can include one or more functional nucleic acids or gene editing compositions designed to reduce expression of an EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, or Nude1 gene, or a gene product thereof.

In some embodiments, the composition is a functional nucleic acid such as a siRNA or RNAi or others described in more detail elsewhere herein that inhibits or otherwise reduces expression of a nucleic acid encoding a protein according to an accession number or sequence identifier of Table 1.

In some embodiments, the composition is a functional nucleic acid such as a siRNA or RNAi or others described in more detail elsewhere herein that inhibits or otherwise reduces expression of a nucleic acid according to an accession number or sequence identifier of Table 1.

For example, in some embodiments, the composition is a functional nucleic acid, particularly RNAi, e.g., double stranded RNAi, that targets an mRNA encoding the EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 protein (e.g., any one of SEQ ID NOS:1, 183-190, or 200-219, or a sequence at least 85%, 90%, or 95% identical thereto). In particular embodiments, the composition is a functional nucleic acid, particularly RNAi, e.g., double stranded RNAi, that targets the mRNA corresponding to or encoded by the DNA sequence of any one of SEQ ID NOS:191-199 or 220-247, or a sequence at least 85%, 90%, or 95% identical thereto.

In some embodiments, the RNAi comprise and RNAi sequence provided herein, for example in the experiments below.

1. Functional Nucleic Acids

a. Antisense

The functional nucleic acids can be antisense molecules. Antisense molecules are designed to interact with a target nucleic acid molecule through either canonical or non-canonical base pairing. The interaction of the antisense molecule and the target molecule is designed to promote the destruction of the target molecule through, for example, RNAse H mediated RNA-DNA hybrid degradation. Alternatively the antisense molecule is designed to interrupt a processing function that normally would take place on the target molecule, such as transcription or replication. Antisense molecules can be designed based on the sequence of the target molecule. There are numerous methods for optimization of antisense efficiency by finding the most accessible regions of the target molecule. Exemplary methods include in vitro selection experiments and DNA modification studies using DMS and DEPC. It is preferred that antisense molecules bind the target molecule with a dissociation constant (Kd) less than or equal to 10−6, 10−8, 10−10, or 10−12.

b. Ribozymes

The functional nucleic acids can be ribozymes. Ribozymes are nucleic acid molecules that are capable of catalyzing a chemical reaction, either intramolecularly or intermolecularly. It is preferred that the ribozymes catalyze intermolecular reactions. There are a number of different types of ribozymes that catalyze nuclease or nucleic acid polymerase type reactions which are based on ribozymes found in natural systems, such as hammerhead ribozymes. There are also a number of ribozymes that are not found in natural systems, but which have been engineered to catalyze specific reactions de novo. Preferred ribozymes cleave RNA or DNA substrates, and more preferably cleave RNA substrates. Ribozymes typically cleave nucleic acid substrates through recognition and binding of the target substrate with subsequent cleavage. This recognition is often based mostly on canonical or non-canonical base pair interactions. This property makes ribozymes particularly good candidates for target specific cleavage of nucleic acids because recognition of the target substrate is based on the target substrates sequence.

c. External Guide Sequences

The functional nucleic acids can be external guide sequences. External guide sequences (EGSs) are molecules that bind a target nucleic acid molecule forming a complex, which is recognized by RNase P, which then cleaves the target molecule. EGSs can be designed to specifically target a RNA molecule of choice. RNAse P aids in processing transfer RNA (tRNA) within a cell. Bacterial RNAse P can be recruited to cleave virtually any RNA sequence by using an EGS that causes the target RNA:EGS complex to mimic the natural tRNA substrate. Similarly, eukaryotic EGS/RNAse P-directed cleavage of RNA can be utilized to cleave desired targets within eukarotic cells. Representative examples of how to make and use EGS molecules to facilitate cleavage of a variety of different target molecules are known in the art.

d. RNA Interference

In some embodiments, the functional nucleic acids induce gene silencing through RNA interference. Gene expression can also be effectively silenced in a highly specific manner through RNA interference (RNAi). This silencing was originally observed with the addition of double stranded RNA (dsRNA) (Fire, et al. (1998) Nature, 391:806-11; Napoli, et al. (1990) Plant Cell 2:279-89; Hannon, (2002) Nature, 418:244-51). Once dsRNA enters a cell, it is cleaved by an RNase III-like enzyme, Dicer, into double stranded small interfering RNAs (siRNA) 21-23 nucleotides in length that contains 2 nucleotide overhangs on the 3′ ends (Elbashir, et al. (2001) Genes Dev., 15:188-200; Bernstein, et al. (2001) Nature, 409:363-6; Hammond, et al. (2000) Nature, 404:293-6). In an ATP dependent step, the siRNAs become integrated into a multi-subunit protein complex, commonly known as the RNAi induced silencing complex (RISC), which guides the siRNAs to the target RNA sequence (Nykanen, et al. (2001) Cell, 107:309-21). At some point the siRNA duplex unwinds, and it appears that the antisense strand remains bound to RISC and directs degradation of the complementary mRNA sequence by a combination of endo and exonucleases (Martinez, et al. (2002) Cell, 110:563-74). However, the effect of iRNA or siRNA or their use is not limited to any type of mechanism.

Short Interfering RNA (siRNA) is a double-stranded RNA that can induce sequence-specific post-transcriptional gene silencing, thereby decreasing or even inhibiting gene expression. In one example, a siRNA triggers the specific degradation of homologous RNA molecules, such as mRNAs, within the region of sequence identity between both the siRNA and the target RNA. For example, WO 02/44321 discloses siRNAs capable of sequence-specific degradation of target mRNAs when base-paired with 3′ overhanging ends, herein incorporated by reference for the method of making these siRNAs.

Sequence specific gene silencing can be achieved in mammalian cells using synthetic, short double-stranded RNAs that mimic the siRNAs produced by the enzyme dicer (Elbashir, et al. (2001) Nature, 411:494 498) (Ui-Tei, et al. (2000) FEBS Lett 479:79-82). siRNA can be chemically or in vitro-synthesized or can be the result of short double-stranded hairpin-like RNAs (shRNAs) that are processed into siRNAs inside the cell. Synthetic siRNAs are generally designed using algorithms and a conventional DNA/RNA synthesizer. Suppliers include Ambion (Austin, Tex.), ChemGenes (Ashland, Mass.), Dharmacon (Lafayette, Colo.), Glen Research (Sterling, Va.), MWB Biotech (Esbersberg, Germany), Proligo (Boulder, Colo.), and Qiagen (Vento, The Netherlands). siRNA can also be synthesized in vitro using kits such as Ambion's SILENCER® siRNA Construction Kit.

The production of siRNA from a vector is more commonly done through the transcription of a short hairpin RNAse (shRNAs). Kits for the production of vectors including shRNA are available, such as, for example, Imgenex's GENESUPPRESSOR™ Construction Kits and Invitrogen's BLOCK-IT™ inducible RNAi plasmid and lentivirus vectors.

In some embodiments, the functional nucleic acid is siRNA, shRNA, miRNA. In some embodiments, the composition includes a vector expressing the functional nucleic acid. Methods of making and using vectors for in vivo expression of functional nucleic acids such as antisense oligonucleotides, siRNA, shRNA, miRNA, EGSs, and ribozymes, are known in the art.

2. Gene Editing Compositions

In some embodiments the functional nucleic acids are gene editing compositions. Gene editing compositions can include nucleic acids that encode an element or elements that induce a single or a double strand break in the target cell's genome, and optionally a polynucleotide. The compositions can be used, for example, to reduce or otherwise modify expression of an EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5.

a. Strand Break Inducing Elements

i. CRISPR/Cas

In some embodiments, the element that induces a single or a double strand break in the target cell's genome is a CRISPR/Cas system. CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats) is an acronym for DNA loci that contain multiple, short, direct repetitions of base sequences. The prokaryotic CRISPR/Cas system has been adapted for use as gene editing (silencing, enhancing or changing specific genes) for use in eukaryotes (see, for example, Cong, Science, 15:339(6121):819-823 (2013) and Jinek, et al., Science, 337(6096):816-21 (2012)). By transfecting a cell with the required elements including a cas gene and specifically designed CRISPRs, the organism's genome can be cut and modified at any desired location. Methods of preparing compositions for use in genome editing using the CRISPR/Cas systems are described in detail in WO 2013/176772 and WO 2014/018423, which are specifically incorporated by reference herein in their entireties.

In general, “CRISPR system” refers collectively to transcripts and other elements involved in the expression of or directing the activity of CRISPR-associated (“Cas”) genes, including sequences encoding a Cas gene, a tracr (trans-activating CRISPR) sequence (e.g., tracrRNA or an active partial tracrRNA), a tracr-mate sequence (encompassing a “direct repeat” and a tracrRNA-processed partial direct repeat in the context of an endogenous CRISPR system), a guide sequence (also referred to as a “spacer” in the context of an endogenous CRISPR system), or other sequences and transcripts from a CRISPR locus. One or more tracr mate sequences operably linked to a guide sequence (e.g., direct repeat-spacer-direct repeat) can also be referred to as pre-crRNA (pre-CRISPR RNA) before processing or crRNA after processing by a nuclease.

In some embodiments, a tracrRNA and crRNA are linked and form a chimeric crRNA-tracrRNA hybrid where a mature crRNA is fused to a partial tracrRNA via a synthetic stem loop to mimic the natural crRNA:tracrRNA duplex as described in Cong, Science, 15:339(6121):819-823 (2013) and Jinek, et al., Science, 337(6096):816-21 (2012)). A single fused crRNA-tracrRNA construct can also be referred to as a guide RNA or gRNA (or single-guide RNA (sgRNA)). Within an sgRNA, the crRNA portion can be identified as the ‘target sequence’ and the tracrRNA is often referred to as the ‘scaffold’.

There are many resources available for helping practitioners determine suitable target sites once a desired DNA target sequence is identified. For example, numerous public resources, including a bioinformatically generated list of about 190,000 potential sgRNAs, targeting more than 40% of human exons, are available to aid practitioners in selecting target sites and designing the associate sgRNA to affect a nick or double strand break at the site. See also, crispr.u-psud.fr/, a tool designed to help scientists find CRISPR targeting sites in a wide range of species and generate the appropriate crRNA sequences.

In some embodiments, one or more vectors driving expression of one or more elements of a CRISPR system are introduced into a target cell such that expression of the elements of the CRISPR system direct formation of a CRISPR complex at one or more target sites. While the specifics can be varied in different engineered CRISPR systems, the overall methodology is similar. A practitioner interested in using CRISPR technology to target a DNA sequence (such as EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5) can insert a short DNA fragment containing the target sequence into a guide RNA expression plasmid. The sgRNA expression plasmid contains the target sequence (about 20 nucleotides), a form of the tracrRNA sequence (the scaffold) as well as a suitable promoter and necessary elements for proper processing in eukaryotic cells. Such vectors are commercially available (see, for example, Addgene). Many of the systems rely on custom, complementary oligos that are annealed to form a double stranded DNA and then cloned into the sgRNA expression plasmid. Co-expression of the sgRNA and the appropriate Cas enzyme from the same or separate plasmids in transfected cells results in a single or double strand break (depending of the activity of the Cas enzyme) at the desired target site.

ii. Zinc Finger Nucleases

In some embodiments, the element that induces a single or a double strand break in the target cell's genome is a nucleic acid construct or constructs encoding a zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs). ZFNs are typically fusion proteins that include a DNA-binding domain derived from a zinc-finger protein linked to a cleavage domain.

The most common cleavage domain is the Type IIS enzyme Fok1. Fok1 catalyzes double-stranded cleavage of DNA, at 9 nucleotides from its recognition site on one strand and 13 nucleotides from its recognition site on the other. See, for example, U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,356,802; 5,436,150 and 5,487,994; as well as Li et al. Proc., Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89 (1992):4275-4279; Li et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 90:2764-2768 (1993); Kim et al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 91:883-887 (1994a); Kim et al. J. Biol. Chem. 269:31,978-31,982 (1994b). One or more of these enzymes (or enzymatically functional fragments thereof) can be used as a source of cleavage domains.

The DNA-binding domain, which can, in principle, be designed to target any genomic location of interest, can be a tandem array of Cys2His2 zinc fingers, each of which generally recognizes three to four nucleotides in the target DNA sequence. The Cys2His2 domain has a general structure: Phe (sometimes Tyr)-Cys-(2 to 4 amino acids)-Cys-(3 amino acids)-Phe (sometimes Tyr)-(5 amino acids)-Leu-(2 amino acids)-His-(3 amino acids)-His. By linking together multiple fingers (the number varies: three to six fingers have been used per monomer in published studies), ZFN pairs can be designed to bind to genomic sequences 18-36 nucleotides long.

Engineering methods include, but are not limited to, rational design and various types of empirical selection methods. Rational design includes, for example, using databases including triplet (or quadruplet) nucleotide sequences and individual zinc finger amino acid sequences, in which each triplet or quadruplet nucleotide sequence is associated with one or more amino acid sequences of zinc fingers which bind the particular triplet or quadruplet sequence. See, for example, U.S. Pat. Nos. 6,140,081; 6,453,242; 6,534,261; 6,610,512; 6,746,838; 6,866,997; 7,067,617; U.S. Published Application Nos. 2002/0165356; 2004/0197892; 2007/0154989; 2007/0213269; and International Patent Application Publication Nos. WO 98/53059 and WO 2003/016496.

iii. Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nucleases

In some embodiments, the element that induces a single or a double strand break in the target cell's genome is a nucleic acid construct or constructs encoding a transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN). TALENs have an overall architecture similar to that of ZFNs, with the main difference that the DNA-binding domain comes from TAL effector proteins, transcription factors from plant pathogenic bacteria. The DNA-binding domain of a TALEN is a tandem array of amino acid repeats, each about 34 residues long. The repeats are very similar to each other; typically they differ principally at two positions (amino acids 12 and 13, called the repeat variable diresidue, or RVD). Each RVD specifies preferential binding to one of the four possible nucleotides, meaning that each TALEN repeat binds to a single base pair, though the NN RVD is known to bind adenines in addition to guanine. TAL effector DNA binding is mechanistically less well understood than that of zinc-finger proteins, but their seemingly simpler code could prove very beneficial for engineered-nuclease design. TALENs also cleave as dimers, have relatively long target sequences (the shortest reported so far binds 13 nucleotides per monomer) and appear to have less stringent requirements than ZFNs for the length of the spacer between binding sites. Monomeric and dimeric TALENs can include more than 10, more than 14, more than 20, or more than 24 repeats.

Methods of engineering TAL to bind to specific nucleic acids are described in Cermak, et al, Nucl. Acids Res. 1-11 (2011). US Published Application No. 2011/0145940, which discloses TAL effectors and methods of using them to modify DNA. Miller et al. Nature Biotechnol 29: 143 (2011) reported making TALENs for site-specific nuclease architecture by linking TAL truncation variants to the catalytic domain of Fold nuclease. The resulting TALENs were shown to induce gene modification in immortalized human cells. General design principles for TALE binding domains can be found in, for example, WO 2011/072246.

b. Gene Altering Polynucleotides

The nuclease activity of the genome editing systems described herein cleave target DNA to produce single or double strand breaks in the target DNA. Double strand breaks can be repaired by the cell in one of two ways: non-homologous end joining, and homology-directed repair. In non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), the double-strand breaks are repaired by direct ligation of the break ends to one another. As such, no new nucleic acid material is inserted into the site, although some nucleic acid material may be lost, resulting in a deletion. In homology-directed repair, a donor polynucleotide with homology to the cleaved target DNA sequence is used as a template for repair of the cleaved target DNA sequence, resulting in the transfer of genetic information from a donor polynucleotide to the target DNA. As such, new nucleic acid material can be inserted/copied into the site.

Therefore, in some embodiments, the genome editing composition optionally includes a donor polynucleotide. The modifications of the target DNA due to NHEJ and/or homology-directed repair can be used to induce gene correction, gene replacement, gene tagging, transgene insertion, nucleotide deletion, gene disruption, gene mutation, etc.

Accordingly, cleavage of DNA by the genome editing composition can be used to delete nucleic acid material from a target DNA sequence by cleaving the target DNA sequence and allowing the cell to repair the sequence in the absence of an exogenously provided donor polynucleotide. Alternatively, if the genome editing composition includes a donor polynucleotide sequence that includes at least a segment with homology to the target DNA sequence, the methods can be used to add, i.e., insert or replace, nucleic acid material to a target DNA sequence (e.g., to “knock in” a nucleic acid that encodes for a protein, an siRNA, an miRNA, etc.), to add a tag (e.g., 6×His, a fluorescent protein (e.g., a green fluorescent protein; a yellow fluorescent protein, etc.), hemagglutinin (HA), FLAG, etc.), to add a regulatory sequence to a gene (e.g., promoter, polyadenylation signal, internal ribosome entry sequence (IRES), 2A peptide, start codon, stop codon, splice signal, localization signal, etc.), to modify a nucleic acid sequence (e.g., introduce a mutation), and the like. As such, the compositions can be used to modify DNA in a site-specific, i.e., “targeted”, way, for example gene knock-out, gene knock-in, gene editing, gene tagging, etc. as used in, for example, gene therapy.

In applications in which it is desirable to insert a polynucleotide sequence into a target DNA sequence, a polynucleotide including a donor sequence to be inserted is also provided to the cell. By a “donor sequence” or “donor polynucleotide” or “donor oligonucleotide” it is meant a nucleic acid sequence to be inserted at the cleavage site. The donor polynucleotide typically contains sufficient homology to a genomic sequence at the cleavage site, e.g., 70%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, or 100% homology with the nucleotide sequences flanking the cleavage site, e.g., within about 50 bases or less of the cleavage site, e.g., within about 30 bases, within about 15 bases, within about 10 bases, within about 5 bases, or immediately flanking the cleavage site, to support homology-directed repair between it and the genomic sequence to which it bears homology. The donor sequence is typically not identical to the genomic sequence that it replaces. Rather, the donor sequence may contain at least one or more single base changes, insertions, deletions, inversions or rearrangements with respect to the genomic sequence, so long as sufficient homology is present to support homology-directed repair. In some embodiments, the donor sequence includes a non-homologous sequence flanked by two regions of homology, such that homology-directed repair between the target DNA region and the two flanking sequences results in insertion of the non-homologous sequence at the target region.

c. Triplex Forming Oligonucleotides

The compound can be triplex forming molecules. Triplex forming molecules are molecules that can interact with either double-stranded or single-stranded nucleic acid. When triplex molecules interact with a target region, a structure called a triplex is formed in which there are three strands of DNA forming a complex dependent on both Watson-Crick and Hoogsteen base-pairing. Triplex molecules are preferred because they can bind target regions with high affinity and specificity. It is preferred that the triplex forming molecules bind the target molecule with a Kd less than 10−6, 10−8, 10−10, or 10−12. Triplex forming molecules are often used in combination with a mutagen or a donor oligonucleotide such as those described above.

3. Oligonucleotide Composition

The functional nucleic acids and gene editing compositions can be DNA or RNA nucleotides which typically include a heterocyclic base (nucleic acid base), a sugar moiety attached to the heterocyclic base, and a phosphate moiety which esterifies a hydroxyl function of the sugar moiety. The principal naturally-occurring nucleotides include uracil, thymine, cytosine, adenine and guanine as the heterocyclic bases, and ribose or deoxyribose sugar linked by phosphodiester bonds.

In some embodiments, the oligonucleotides are composed of nucleotide analogs that have been chemically modified to improve stability, half-life, or specificity or affinity for a target receptor, relative to a DNA or RNA counterpart. The chemical modifications include chemical modification of nucleobases, sugar moieties, nucleotide linkages, or combinations thereof. As used herein ‘modified nucleotide” or “chemically modified nucleotide” defines a nucleotide that has a chemical modification of one or more of the heterocyclic base, sugar moiety or phosphate moiety constituents. In some embodiments, the charge of the modified nucleotide is reduced compared to DNA or RNA oligonucleotides of the same nucleobase sequence. For example, the oligonucleotide can have low negative charge, no charge, or positive charge.

Typically, nucleoside analogs support bases capable of hydrogen bonding by Watson-Crick base pairing to standard polynucleotide bases, where the analog backbone presents the bases in a manner to permit such hydrogen bonding in a sequence-specific fashion between the oligonucleotide analog molecule and bases in a standard polynucleotide (e.g., single-stranded RNA or single-stranded DNA). In some embodiments, the analogs have a substantially uncharged, phosphorus containing backbone.

a. Heterocyclic Bases

The principal naturally-occurring nucleotides include uracil, thymine, cytosine, adenine and guanine as the heterocyclic bases. The oligonucleotides can include chemical modifications to their nucleobase constituents. Chemical modifications of heterocyclic bases or heterocyclic base analogs may be effective to increase the binding affinity or stability in binding a target sequence. Chemically-modified heterocyclic bases include, but are not limited to, inosine, 5-(1-propynyl) uracil (pU), 5-(1-propynyl) cytosine (pC), 5-methylcytosine, 8-oxo-adenine, pseudocytosine, pseudoisocytosine, 5 and 2-amino-5-(2′-deoxy-.beta.-D-ribofuranosyl)pyridine (2-aminopyridine), and various pyrrolo- and pyrazolopyrimidine derivatives.

b. Sugar Modifications

Oligonucleotides can also contain nucleotides with modified sugar moieties or sugar moiety analogs. Sugar moiety modifications include, but are not limited to, 2′-O-aminoetoxy, 2′-O-amonioethyl (2′-OAE), 2′-O-methoxy, 2′-O-methyl, 2-guanidoethyl (2′-OGE), 2′-O,4′-C-methylene (LNA), 2′-O-(methoxyethyl) (2′-OME) and 2′-O—(N-(methyl)acetamido) (2′-OMA). 2′-O-aminoethyl sugar moiety substitutions are especially preferred because they are protonated at neutral pH and thus suppress the charge repulsion between the TFO and the target duplex. This modification stabilizes the C3′-endo conformation of the ribose or dexyribose and also forms a bridge with the i−1 phosphate in the purine strand of the duplex.

In some embodiments, the oligonucleotide is a morpholino oligonucleotide. Morpholino oligonucleotides are typically composed of two more morpholino monomers containing purine or pyrimidine base-pairing moieties effective to bind, by base-specific hydrogen bonding, to a base in a polynucleotide, which are linked together by phosphorus-containing linkages, one to three atoms long, joining the morpholino nitrogen of one monomer to the 5′ exocyclic carbon of an adjacent monomer. The purine or pyrimidine base-pairing moiety is typically adenine, cytosine, guanine, uracil or thymine. The synthesis, structures, and binding characteristics of morpholino oligomers are detailed in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,698,685, 5,217,866, 5,142,047, 5,034,506, 5,166,315, 5,521,063, and 5,506,337.

Important properties of the morpholino-based subunits typically include: the ability to be linked in a oligomeric form by stable, uncharged backbone linkages; the ability to support a nucleotide base (e.g. adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymidine, uracil or inosine) such that the polymer formed can hybridize with a complementary-base target nucleic acid, including target RNA, with high Tm, even with oligomers as short as 10-14 bases; the ability of the oligomer to be actively transported into mammalian cells; and the ability of an oligomer:RNA heteroduplex to resist RNAse degradation.

In some embodiments, oligonucleotides employ morpholino-based subunits bearing base-pairing moieties, joined by uncharged linkages, as described above.

c. Internucleotide Linkages

Oligonucleotides connected by an internucleotide bond that refers to a chemical linkage between two nucleoside moieties. Modifications to the phosphate backbone of DNA or RNA oligonucleotides may increase the binding affinity or stability oligonucleotides, or reduce the susceptibility of oligonucleotides nuclease digestion. Cationic modifications, including, but not limited to, diethyl-ethylenediamide (DEED) or dimethyl-aminopropylamine (DMAP) may be especially useful due to decrease electrostatic repulsion between the oligonucleotide and a target. Modifications of the phosphate backbone may also include the substitution of a sulfur atom for one of the non-bridging oxygens in the phosphodiester linkage. This substitution creates a phosphorothioate internucleoside linkage in place of the phosphodiester linkage. Oligonucleotides containing phosphorothioate internucleoside linkages have been shown to be more stable in vivo.

Examples of modified nucleotides with reduced charge include modified internucleotide linkages such as phosphate analogs having achiral and uncharged intersubunit linkages (e.g., Sterchak, E. P. et al., Organic. Chem., 52:4202, (1987)), and uncharged morpholino-based polymers having achiral intersubunit linkages (see, e.g., U.S. Pat. No. 5,034,506), as discussed above. Some internucleotide linkage analogs include morpholidate, acetal, and polyamide-linked heterocycles.

In another embodiment, the oligonucleotides are composed of locked nucleic acids. Locked nucleic acids (LNA) are modified RNA nucleotides (see, for example, Braasch, et al., Chem. Biol., 8(1):1-7 (2001)). LNAs form hybrids with DNA which are more stable than DNA/DNA hybrids, a property similar to that of peptide nucleic acid (PNA)/DNA hybrids. Therefore, LNA can be used just as PNA molecules would be. LNA binding efficiency can be increased in some embodiments by adding positive charges to it. Commercial nucleic acid synthesizers and standard phosphoramidite chemistry are used to make LNAs.

In some embodiments, the oligonucleotides are composed of peptide nucleic acids. Peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) are synthetic DNA mimics in which the phosphate backbone of the oligonucleotide is replaced in its entirety by repeating N-(2-aminoethyl)-glycine units and phosphodiester bonds are typically replaced by peptide bonds. The various heterocyclic bases are linked to the backbone by methylene carbonyl bonds. PNAs maintain spacing of heterocyclic bases that is similar to conventional DNA oligonucleotides, but are achiral and neutrally charged molecules. Peptide nucleic acids are composed of peptide nucleic acid monomers.

Other backbone modifications include peptide and amino acid variations and modifications. Thus, the backbone constituents of oligonucleotides such as PNA may be peptide linkages, or alternatively, they may be non-peptide peptide linkages. Examples include acetyl caps, amino spacers such as 8-amino-3,6-dioxaoctanoic acid (referred to herein as O-linkers), amino acids such as lysine are particularly useful if positive charges are desired in the PNA, and the like. Methods for the chemical assembly of PNAs are well known. See, for example, U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,539,082, 5,527,675, 5,623,049, 5,714,331, 5,736,336, 5,773,571 and 5,786,571.

Oligonucleotides optionally include one or more terminal residues or modifications at either or both termini to increase stability, and/or affinity of the oligonucleotide for its target. Commonly used positively charged moieties include the amino acids lysine and arginine, although other positively charged moieties may also be useful. Oligonucleotides may further be modified to be end capped to prevent degradation using a propylamine group. Procedures for 3′ or 5′ capping oligonucleotides are well known in the art.

In some embodiments, the compounds can be single stranded or double stranded.

4. Protease Inhibitors

The disclosed inhibitors of target genes or gene products can be one or more protease inhibitors. For example, in particular embodiments, the inhibitor of a disclosed gene product, particularly the Nude1 gene product, is a protease inhibitor or a cocktail of two or more protease inhibitors.

Protease inhibitors are molecules that block, reduce or otherwise limit the activity of proteases. Typically, a protease inhibitor functions on classes of proteases with similar mechanisms of action. Protease inhibitors can be proteins, peptides, or small molecules. In some embodiments, the protease inhibitor is an antibody or functional fragment thereof. The protease inhibitors can be naturally occurring or synthetic. Naturally occurring protease inhibitors are usually proteins or peptides. Protease inhibitors used in experimental studies or thug development are often synthetic peptide-like or small molecules.

Protease inhibitors can work in many different ways to inhibit the action of proteases. These inhibitors can be classified by the type of proteases they inhibit and the mechanism by which they inhibit the protease enzyme. Reversible inhibitors usually bind to the protease with multiple non-covalent interactions, without any change to the inhibitor itself. These inhibitors can be removed by dilution or dialysis. Reversible inhibitors include competitive inhibitors (which compete with substrates for access to the active site), uncompetitive inhibitors (which bind to the protease only when it is already attached to a substrate), and non-competitive inhibitors (bind to the protease with similar affinities, regardless of the presence of a bound substrate; typically inhibit protease activity through an allosteric mechanism). Irreversible protease inhibitors function by specifically altering the active site of its specific target protease, often through the covalent bond formation. They can also be called inactivators. Upon binding to the inhibitor, a protease's active site is altered, and it can no longer perform peptide bond hydrolysis. Some of such inhibitors do not actually covalently bind to the protease, but interact with such a high affinity, that they are not easily removed, Suicide inhibitors, typically analogs of the substrate, are irreversible inhibitors that covalently bind to proteases. An example of a suicide protease inhibitor is the serpin family of proteins, which play a role in blood coagulation and inflammation.

Many different protease inhibitors are commercially available. Protease inhibitors can be in liquid form or solid form (e.g., tablets). Protease inhibitors can be used individually or as a cocktail containing multiple protease inhibitors in defined concentrations. Protease inhibitor cocktails are often used for their reliability and reproducibility.

In preferred embodiments, the protease inhibitor is specific to a particular protease (e.g., Nudel) or to one or more general classes of proteases (e.g., serine proteases).

Exemplary protease inhibitors include, but are not limited to, AEBSF/Pefabloc, Aprotinin, Bestatin, E-64, EDTA, EGTA, GM 6001, Leupeptin, Pepstatin, PMSF, and valine-pyrrolidide. MilliporeSigma, STEMCELL Technologies, and Thermo Fisher are common vendors for protease inhibitors.

### III. Methods of Use

Methods of inhibiting target genes or gene products such as EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 are provided. The methods typically include contacting mosquito cells with an effective amount of an inhibitor, such as a functional nucleic acid, gene editing composition or protease inhibitor specific for one or more target gene or gene product (e.g., EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5) to reduce expression, activity, or bioavailability of the gene or a gene product thereof (e.g., EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5). The functional nucleic acid or gene editing composition can be introduced into the mosquito cells in any manner and at any time suitable to reduce, inhibit, or interfere with a target gene or gene product, e.g. EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5. The contacting can be in vivo. Thus, for example, in some embodiments, the compositions are introduced into mosquito cells during or after the composition is contacted with or administered to live mosquitoes. The mosquitoes can be at any stages of development. For example, the mosquitoes can be embryonic, larval, pupal, adult, etc. In some embodiments, the mosquito cells are eggs that can be contacted inside or outside of the mother.

Preferably the EOF1-, Nasrat-, Closca-, Polehole-, Nudel-, CATL3-, DCE2-, DCE4-, or DCE5-inhibiting compositions are contacted with mosquito cells in an effective amount to induce one or more desired physiologic or phenotypic effects in the treated mosquito or cells thereof. For example, in some embodiments, the level of alternation to EOF1-, Nasrat-, Closca-, Polehole-, Nudel-, CATL3-, DCE2-, DCE4-, or DCE5 gene or gene product activity is sufficient to reduce or prevent embryos from completing embryogenesis and/or reaching the first larval instar; reduces, delays, or otherwise disrupts eggshell formation and/or egg melanization, reduces egg survival, alters the follicular shape of eggs, increases permeability of oocytes to water, reduces female fecundity, leads to an embryonic lethal phenotype, or any combination thereof.

The disclosed methods can be used to prevent the spread of mosquito-borne illnesses. Mosquito-borne illnesses include, but are not limited to, mosquito vectored diseases such as protozoan diseases, i.e., malaria, filarial diseases such as dog heartworm, and viruses such as Dengue, encephalitis, West Nile virus, rift valley fever, and yellow fever, as well as severe skin irritation through an allergic reaction to the mosquito's saliva.

A. Methods of Inhibiting Target Genes/Gene Products in Mosquitoes

Methods of genetic manipulation of mosquitoes including the effective amount of nucleic acids needed, methods of administration, and timing of administration can be selected by the practitioner based on the particular compounds and methods chosen.

For example, an RNAi-based method is exemplified in the experiments described below, and typically involves introducing dsRNA into mosquito cells. See, e.g., Airs and Bartholomay, Insects. 2017 March; 8(1): 4 and references cited therein, which is specifically incorporated by reference in its entirety. Airs and Bartholomy, supra, which discusses that RNAi can be delivered to mosquitoes from embryo through adulthood and provides diverse examples of both (A) delivery systems and (B) RNAi trigger molecules (see also FIG. 2) that can be employed to suppress genes in mosquitoes. Examples shown include: (1) naked RNAi triggers such as dsRNA, siRNA, or chemically modified siRNA (star shape); (2) transfection agents with dsRNA or shRNA expressing plasmids; (3) nanoparticles of abiotic or biotic origin in combination with dsRNA or plasmids; (4) viral expression systems carrying dsRNA or ssRNA that is converted to dsRNA in the cell; (5) bacterial expression systems containing dsRNA or shRNA plasmids; and (6) yeast expression systems containing dsRNA or shRNA plasmids.

In some embodiments, the method includes administering mosquitoes a functional nucleic acid, particularly RNAi, e.g., double stranded RNAi that targets an mRNA encoding the EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 protein (e.g., any one of SEQ ID NOS:1, 183-190, or 200-219, or a sequence at least 85%, 90%, or 95% identical thereto). In particular embodiments, the composition is a functional nucleic acid, particularly RNAi, e.g., double stranded RNAi that targets the mRNA corresponding to the cDNA sequence of any one of SEQ ID NOS:191-199 or 220-247 or a sequence at least 85%, 90%, or 95% identical thereto.

Techniques for gene modification in mosquitoes is also well known, published examples including transposon-mediated transgenesis (Coates Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 1998; 95: 3748-3751; Lobo et al., Insect Mol. Biol. 2002; 11: 133-139) and loss-of-function gene editing with zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) (DeGennaro et al., Nature. 2013; 498: 487-491; Liesch et al., PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 2013; 7: e2486, McMeniman et al., Cell. 2014; 156: 1060-1071), TAL-effector nucleases (TALENS) (Aryan et al., PLoS ONE. 2013; 8: e60082, Aryan et al., Methods. 2014; 69: 38-45), and homing endonuclease genes (HEGs) (Aryan et al., Sci. Rep. 2013; 3: 1603). ZFNs and TALENs are modular DNA-binding proteins tethered to a non-specific FokI DNA nuclease (Carroll, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2014; 83: 409-439), while HEGs are naturally occurring endonucleases that can be reengineered to target new sequences (Stoddard, Mob. DNA. 2014; 5: 7 (2014)). Targeting specificity by these reagents is conferred by context-sensitive protein-DNA-binding interactions.

The CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing methodology and gene-drive systems have also been employed in mosquitoes. See, for example, Basu, et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112(13):4038-43. pmid:25775608; Dong, et al., PLoS One. 2015; 10(3): e0122353. pmid:25815482; Kistler, et al., Cell Rep. 2015; 11(1):51-60. pmid:25818303; Hall, et al., Science. 2015; 348(6240):1268-70. pmid:25999371; Itokawa, et al., Sci Rep. 2016; 6:24652. pmid:27095599; and Grigoraki, et al., Sci Rep. 2017; 7(1):11699. pmid:28916816, which exemplify CRIPSR/Cas9 gene editing in Aedes aegypti, Anopheles stephensi, and Culex mosquitoes. Furthermore, Kistler and colleagues (Kistler, et al., Cell Rep. 2015; 11(1):51-60. pmid:25818303) have established a comprehensive protocol for CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing in Aedes mosquitoes through embryonic delivery of in vitro-synthesized guide RNA (sgRNA) and recombinant Cas9 protein. CRISPR/Cas9 mediated somatic disruption of a male-determining gene in Aedes mosquitoes has produced males with feminized genitalia (Hall, et al., Science. 2015; 348(6240):1268-70. pmid:25999371), and Cas9-mediated gene drive technology has also proven promising for population modification of both Asian and African malaria vector mosquitoes, A. stephensi and A. gambiae, respectively (Gantz, et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112(49):E6736-43. pmid:26598698; Hammond, et al., Nat Biotechnol. 2016; 34(1):78-83. pmid:26641531; Hammond, et al., PLoS Genet. 2017; 13(10):e1007039. pmid:28976972).

As disclosed herein, EOF1 is expressed by females and is important for eggshell development. It is not believed to be essential in males. One preferred strategy is to use CRISPR-Cas endonuclease (or another nucleases such as zinc finger nucleases or a TALENs) constructs that function as gene drive systems to reduce or completely eliminate egg development or egg fitness in females. Because the eggshell development is not essential to male fitness, genetically modified males can be released and serve that carriers that introduce the reduced fertility to one or more generations of females. See, e.g., Mathews, “A genetically modified organism could end malaria and save millions of lives—if we decide to use it,” VOX, updated Sep. 26, 2018; Kyrou, et al., “A CRISPR-Cas9 gene drive targeting doublesex causes complete population suppression in caged Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes,” Nature Biotechnology, published online 24 Sep. 2018; doi:10.1038/nbt.4245; Hammond, et al., “A CRISPR-Cas9 gene drive system targeting female reproduction in the malaria mosquito vector Anopheles gambiae,” Nature Biotechnology, 34:78-83 (2016).

The target for gene modification can be any one or more of the genes encoding an EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 protein (e.g., any one of SEQ ID NOS:1, 183-190, or 200-219, or a sequence at least 85%, 90%, or 95% identical thereto.

B. Pesticide Compositions

Other (or inert) ingredients may be included in the composition to aid in the application of the compound (e.g. functional nucleic acid, gene editing composition, protease inhibitor, etc.), also referred to the active agent with respect to the composition. Typically, the other ingredients do not eliminate (e.g., through degradation) the compound. Thus, preferably the other ingredients are of a composition and/or are used in a concentration compatible with the target gene or gene product (e.g., EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5) inhibitor compound.

In some embodiments, the composition includes a delivery vehicle to enhance stability, transfectability, or a combination thereof. For example in some embodiments, the compound is delivered via a liposome. Commercially available liposome preparations such as LIPOFECTIN, LIPOFECTAMINE (GIBCO-BRL, Inc., Gaithersburg, Md.), SUPERFECT (Qiagen, Inc. Hilden, Germany) and TRANSFECTAM (Promega Biotec, Inc., Madison, Wis.), as well as other liposomes developed according to procedures standard in the art are well known. This disclosed compositions and methods can be used in conjunction with any of these or other commonly used gene transfer methods.

In some embodiments, the delivery vehicle is incorporated into or encapsulated by a nanoparticle, microparticle, micelle, synthetic lipoprotein particle, or carbon nanotube. For example, the compositions can be incorporated into a vehicle such as polymeric particles which provide controlled release of the compound. In some embodiments, release of the compound is controlled by diffusion of the compound out of the particles and/or degradation of the polymeric particles by hydrolysis and/or enzymatic degradation. Suitable polymers include ethylcellulose and other natural or synthetic cellulose derivatives. Polymers which are slowly soluble and form a gel in an aqueous environment, such as hydroxypropyl methylcellulose or polyethylene oxide may also be suitable as materials for compound containing particles. Other polymers include, but are not limited to, polyanhydrides, poly (ester anhydrides), polyhydroxy acids, such as polylactide (PLA), polyglycolide (PGA), poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA), poly-3-hydroxybut rate (PHB) and copolymers thereof, poly-4-hydroxybutyrate (P4HB) and copolymers thereof, polycaprolactone and copolymers thereof, and combinations thereof.

The compound can be incorporated into materials which are insoluble in aqueous solution or slowly soluble in aqueous solution, but are capable of degrading by means including enzymatic degradation, surfactant action, and/or mechanical erosion. As used herein, the term “slowly soluble in water” refers to materials that are not dissolved in water within a period of 30 minutes. Preferred examples include fats, fatty substances, waxes, waxlike substances and mixtures thereof. Suitable fats and fatty substances include fatty alcohols (such as lauryl, myristyl stearyl, cetyl or cetostearyl alcohol), fatty acids and derivatives, including, but not limited to, fatty acid esters, fatty acid glycerides (mono-, di- and tri-glycerides), and hydrogenated fats. Specific examples include, but are not limited to hydrogenated vegetable oil, hydrogenated cottonseed oil, hydrogenated castor oil, hydrogenated oils available under the trade name Sterotex®, stearic acid, cocoa butter, and stearyl alcohol. Suitable waxes and wax-like materials include natural or synthetic waxes, hydrocarbons, and normal waxes.

Specific examples of waxes include beeswax, glycowax, castor wax, carnauba wax, paraffins and candelilla wax. As used herein, a wax-like material is defined as any material which is normally solid at room temperature and has a melting point of from about 30 to 300° C.

Other ingredients include but are not limited to, solvents, carriers, adjuvants, or any other compound, besides the active ingredient. There are many types of other ingredients: solvents are liquids that dissolve the active ingredient, carriers are liquids or solid chemicals that are added to a pesticide product to aid in the delivery of the active ingredient, and adjuvants often help make the pesticide stick to or spread out on the application surface (i.e., leaves). Other adjuvants aid in the mixing of some compositions when they are diluted for application.

The compound may be applied as a solid, such as in the form of pellets or flakes. For example, the compound may be included in a solid pellet that is introduced into a water source.

The compound may be dissolved or dispersed in a continuous phase. The continuous phase typically contains a surfactant wetting agent, e.g. alkyl/aryl polyether alcohols, polyethylene oxide esters (or ethers) of fatty acids, alkyl/aryl sulfonates, alkyl sulfates and the like. The surfactant is preferably present in the amount of about 0.1% up to about 5% vol/vol of the composition. These surface active agents are well known in the art for use in preparing dispersions of insecticides. In the continuous phase of the composition, the surfactants assist in causing the solution droplets to spread out on waxy leaves and penetrate the waxy protective coating on the insects and their eggs.

Suitable surfactants may be anionic, cationic, amphoteric or nonionic surface-active agents. Suitable anionic surfactants include, but are not limited to, those containing carboxylate, sulfonate and sulfate ions. Examples of anionic surfactants include sodium, potassium, ammonium of long chain alkyl sulfonates and alkyl aryl sulfonates such as sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate; dialkyl sodium sulfosuccinates, such as sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate; dialkyl sodium sulfosuccinates, such as sodium bis-(2-ethylthioxyl)-sulfosuccinate; and alkyl sulfates such as sodium lauryl sulfate. Cationic surfactants include, but are not limited to, quaternary ammonium compounds such as benzalkonium chloride, benzethonium chloride, cetrimonium bromide, stearyl dimethylbenzyl ammonium chloride, polyoxyethylene and coconut amine. Examples of nonionic surfactants include ethylene glycol monostearate, propylene glycol myristate, glyceryl monostearate, glyceryl stearate, polyglyceryl-4-oleate, sorbitan acylate, sucrose acylate, PEG-150 laurate, PEG-400 monolaurate, polyoxyethylene monolaurate, polysorbates, polyoxyethylene octylphenylether, PEG-1000 cetyl ether, polyoxyethylene tridecyl ether, polypropylene glycol butyl ether, Poloxamer® 401, stearoyl monoisopropanolamide, and polyoxyethylene hydrogenated tallow amide. Examples of amphoteric surfactants include sodium N-dodecyl-β-alanine, sodium N-lauryl-β-iminodipropionate, myristoamphoacetate, lauryl betaine, and lauryl sulfobetaine.

In some embodiments, the compositions can include one or more carriers and/or diluents such as, for example, any solid or liquid carrier or diluent that is commonly used in pesticidal, agricultural, or horticultural compositions. Those skilled in the art will recognize that these components in a composition are typically referred to as “inert ingredients” and are regulated by governmental agencies, such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Suitably, any included additional carrier or diluent will not reduce the insecticidal efficacy of the composition, relative to the efficacy of the composition in the absence of the additional component. Carriers and diluents can include, for example, solvents (e.g., water, alcohols, petroleum distillates, acids, and esters); vegetable oil (including but not limited to methylated vegetable oil); and/or plant-based oils as well as ester derivatives thereof (e.g., wintergreen oil, cedarwood oil, rosemary oil, peppermint oil, geraniol, rose oil, palmarosa oil, citronella oil, citrus oils (e.g., lemon, lime, and orange), dillweed oil, corn oil, sesame oil, soybean oil, palm oil, vegetable oil, olive oil, peanut oil, and canola oil). The composition can include varying amounts of other components such as, for example, fatty acids and fatty acid esters of plant oils (e.g., methyl palmitate/oleate/linoleate), and other auxiliary ingredients such as, for example, emulsifiers, dispersants, stabilizers, suspending agents, penetrants, coloring agents/dyes, UV-absorbing agents, and fragrances, as necessary or desired. The compositions may include a carrier or diluent in an amount of at least about 1%, at least about 2%, or at least about 5% by weight of the composition. The compositions may include a carrier or diluent in an amount of less than about 30%, less than about 25%, or less than about 20% by weight of the composition. The compositions may include carrier or diluent in an amount of about 1% to about 30%, about 2% to about 25%, or about 5% to about 20% by weight of the composition. Components other than mineral oil and coconut oil can be included in the compositions in any amount as long as the composition provides some amount of insecticidal efficacy.

C. Methods of Administration

The methods of administration can also be selected based on the desired target species and life stage with consideration for environmental and abiotic factors including: UV, ribonucleases, microbes, dissipation and dilution in aqueous environs and on solid substrates. Methods of delivering RNAi to mosquitoes are described in Airs and Barholomay, et al., Insects. 2017 March; 8(1): 4, doi: 10.3390/insects8010004, which is specifically incorporated by reference in its entirety, as well as references cited therein, and such methods may also be useful for other types of nucleic acid compounds.

Infrastructure and techniques for a variety of interventions already exist to deliver chemical and biological pesticides to vector mosquitoes, including, for example, topical and contact applications for adults (e.g., aerial and residual spraying and long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs)) and per os or contact applications for aquatic stages.

Suitable methods include contacting a mosquito or population of mosquitoes with an effective amount of a composition as described above. Contacting includes contacting an insect directly or indirectly. For example, compositions described herein may be applied to a surface and an insect may subsequently or concurrently contact the surface and the composition. In some embodiments, compositions may be applied to a surface. In some embodiments, compositions may form a coating or film on a surface. In some embodiments, methods include forming a coating or film on a surface.

Surfaces may include, but are not limited to, surfaces of liquid such as bodies of water or other aquatic mosquito breeding sites. Examples of bodies of water and application sites include, without limitation, salt marshes, freshwater aquatic environments, storm water drainage areas, sewers and catch basins, woodland pools, snow pools, roadside ditches, retention ponds, freshwater dredge spoils, tire tracks, rock holes, pot holes, and similar areas subject to holding water; natural and manmade aquatic sites, fish ponds, ornamental ponds, fountains, and other artificial water-holding containers or tanks; flooded crypts, transformer vaults, abandoned swimming pools, construction, and other natural or manmade depressions; stream eddies, creek edges, detention ponds, freshwater swamps and marshes including mixed hardwood swamps, cattail marshes, common reed wetlands, water hyacinth ponds, and similar freshwater areas with emergent vegetation; brackish water swamps, marshes, and intertidal areas; sewage effluent, sewers, sewage lagoons, cesspools, oxidation ponds, septic ditches, and septic tanks; animal waste lagoons, settling ponds, livestock runoff lagoons, and wastewater impoundments associated with fruit and vegetable processing; and similar areas. Other examples include, without limitation, dormant rice fields (for application during the interval between harvest and preparation of the field for the next cropping cycle), standing water within pastures/hay fields, rangeland, orchards, and citrus groves where mosquito breeding occurs.

In some embodiments, the methods described herein include any known route, apparatus, and/or mechanism for the delivery or application of the compositions. In some embodiments, the method includes applying the compositions via a sprayer. Traditional pesticide sprayers in the pest control markets are typically operated manually or electrically or are gas-controlled and use maximum pressures ranging from 15 to 500 psi generating flow rates from 1 gpm to 40 gpm.

Certain steps can be taken to increase the delivery of nucleic acids to the desired mosquito or mosquito cells, and reduce environmental degradation of the composition. For example, RNAi knockdown in larvae by per os exposure is efficacious using scalable bacterial and yeast expression systems, demonstrating potential for RNAi in larval control applications. Interventions have also been explored to provide oral applications to adults in the form of Attractive Toxic Sugar Baits (ATSB): formulations that can include, for example, simple sucrose solutions and complex mixtures of fruit sugars with minimal effects on non-target organisms. Formulations can be delivered either via spraying on, for example, plant sources or in bait stations. Spray formulations have proven effective on flowering and non-flowering plants in arid and wet climates, and bait stations placed near breeding sites (referred to as Attractive Baited Oviposition Trap (ABOT)) or indoors can attract and vector species in proximity to people. Although ATSB have not been studied in conjunction with RNAi, successful gene silencing by oral exposure routes has been documented using sucrose meals and artificial blood meals demonstrating the potential of utilizing these approaches to deploy nucleic acid compounds to mosquitoes.

In both baited strategies and more traditional insecticidal delivery approaches (ultra-low volume or residual sprays, or LLINs), nucleic acid compositions may be more efficacious in combination with biotic (e.g., a virus, yeast or bacterial expression system) or abiotic (e.g., nanoparticles, liposomes, PRINT, etc.) systems that mediate both protection and uptake of nucleic acids. As discussed above, in some embodiments, the nucleic acids or vectors encoding them include chemically modified nucleotides that increase their stability and/or otherwise reduce degradation.

In some embodiments, the compositions are delivered directly to mosquitoes using conventional impregnated bed nets, spraying, and/or direct application to a water source. These methods of administration are often preferred for use in areas with high transmission rates of mosquito-borne diseases.

As discussed in the examples below, EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, and Nude1 play important roles in eggshell melanization and embryonic development. In some embodiments, the compound is administered in a method suitable to reduce, inhibit, or prevent expression of the EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 gene or a product thereof in female mosquitoes at least a few days prior to blood feeding in the first and/or second (preferably both) gonotrophic cycles; about one and about three days after oviposition; or a combination thereof in order to induce EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 depletion and produce defective egg phenotypes. For example, in some embodiments, the compound is administered at between about 2 days and 5 days prior to blood feeding in the first and/or second (preferably both) gonotrophic cycles (e.g., about 2 days, about 3 days, about 4 days, about 5 days, or a combination thereof). In some embodiments, the compound is administered about one, about two, about three days, or a combination thereof after oviposition. Thus, in some embodiments, the compound administered at, or around, these time. In other embodiments, the compound is administered at an earlier time, but the compound is still effective to reduce, inhibit, or prevent expression of the EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5 gene or a product thereof during these periods.

In some embodiments, the compound is administered up to, along with, or after a blood feeding, particularly wherein the compound targets Nudel.

D. Diseases to Be Treated and Mosquitoes to be Targeted

The compounds described herein may be administered to reduce or prevent the spread or transmission of diseases, illnesses, and infections caused by mosquitoes in a population of animals, for example, humans. Such diseases and infections include, but are not limited to, West Nile Virus, La Crosse Encephalitis, Jamestown Canyon Virus, Western Equine Encephalitis, Eastern Equine Encephalitis, St. Louis Encephalitis, Chikungungya, Dengue Fever, Malaria, Yellow Fever, and Zika Virus.

Mosquitoes that can be target of the disclosed compositions and methods include, but are not limited to, Aedes (Stegomyia) spp., including Aedes aegypti, Aedes albopictus, Aedes polynesiensis and other members of the Aedes scutellaris, Anopheles dirus, Anopheles minimus, Anopheles philippinensis, and Anopheles sundaicus, Culiseta melanura, Culiseta morsitans, Aedes atlanticus, Culiseta particeps, Aedesatropalpus, Deinocerites cancer, Aedes canadensis, Mansonia titillans, Aedes cantator, Orthopodomyia signifera, Aedes cinereus, Psorophora ciliate, Aedes condolescens, Psorophora columbiae, Aedes dorsalis, Psorophora ferox, Aedes dupreei, Psorophora howardii, Aedes epactius, Uranotaenia sapphirina, Aedes fitchii, Aedes fulvus pallens, Aedes grossbecki, Aedes infirmatus, Aedes japonicas, Aedes melanimon, Aedes nigromaculis, Aedes provocans, Aedes sollicitans, Aedes squamiger, Aedes sticticus, Aedes stimulans, Aedes taeniorhynchus, Aedes triseriatus, Aedes trivittatus, Aedes vexans, Anopheles atropos, Anopheles barberi, Anopheles bradleyi/crucians, Anopheles franciscanus, Anopheles freebomi, Anopheles hermsi, Anopheles punctipennis, Anopheles quadrimaculatus, Anopheles walker, Coquillettidia perturbans, Culex apicalis, Culex bahamensis, Culex coronator, Culex erraticus, Culex erythrothorax, Culex nigripalpus, Culex pipiens, Culex quinquefasciatus, Culex restuans, Culex salinarius, Culex stigmatosoma, Culex tarsalis, Culex territans, Culex thriambus, Culiseta incidens, Culiseta impatiens, and Culiseta inornata.

As discussed in more detail below, EOF1 may be involved in the specification of the outer chorionic area surrounded by the exochorionic network in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes. Thus, inhibiting EOF1 expression or reducing its activity for mosquito population control and disease transmission may be most effective in mosquito species in which EOF1 or a variant or homologue related thereto plays this role. In some embodiments, the mosquitoes that are the target of the disclosed compositions and methods have EOF1 protein or a variant or homologue thereof in their eggshells or otherwise express the protein during their eggshell development program. Conversely, mosquitoes, insects, and other animals that do not have EOF1 protein or a variant or homologue thereof in their eggshells or otherwise express the protein during their eggshell development program may not be preferred targets of the disclosed compositions and methods, and may not be strongly affected by them.

The Examples show that Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, and Nude1 are important for egg melanization, egg viability, and oocyte permeability. Thus, inhibiting Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nude1 or other gene (e.g., CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5) expression or reducing Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, or other gene (e.g., CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5) activity for mosquito population control and disease transmission may be most effective in mosquito species in which Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, or other gene (e.g., CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, or DCE5) or a variant or homologue related thereto plays these or similar roles. In some embodiments, the mosquitoes that are the target of the disclosed compositions and methods have Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, or CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and/or DCE5 proteins or a variant or homologue thereof in their eggshells or ovaries or otherwise express the protein during their eggshell development program. Conversely, mosquitoes, insects, and other animals that do not have Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and DCE5 protein or a variant or homologue thereof in their eggshells or ovaries or otherwise express the protein during their eggshell development program may not be preferred targets of the disclosed compositions and methods, and may not be strongly affected by them.

### IV. Kits

Kits containing compositions are also provided. The compositions may be packaged in any suitable container or source structure affording a desired supply of the composition for its intended purpose. For example, the compositions may be packaged in an aerosol container, as a fogger or spray unit, for fogging, misting or spraying of the pest-control composition to a desired locus of use. The composition alternatively can be packaged in a container equipped with a hand pump dispenser unit or other applicator, administration or dispensing elements. These embodiments are particularly useful for application of the compositions in areas inhabited by blood-ingesting pests that are vectors of human pathogens, such as mosquitoes.

### V. Screens for Mosquito-Specific Genes

A. Gene Target Identification In Silico

Methods for identifying mosquito lineage-specific genes are also provided. Data mining and bioinformatic analysis can be carried out using a database such as GenBank database to identify putative protein-coding and non-protein coding sequences that are only present in the genomes of one or more mosquitoes such as those discussed herein. A cut-off for expected value threshold of, for example, about 1e-15, can be used to help identify mosquito-specific genes.

In some embodiments, mosquito-specific putative genes without corresponding mRNA (or orthologue thereof) in an expressed sequence tag (EST) or expressed transcriptome shotgun assembly (TSA) database are excluded to enhance for selection of protein-coding genes.

In some embodiments, genes that appear to be members of a multigene family can be excluded due to possible functional redundancy with other gene family members.

In some embodiments, putative genes identified according to the foregoing steps are excluded if a corresponding homologue is found in one or more evolutionarily closely related organisms within the suborder Nematocera such as phantom midges, true midges, crane fly, and sandflies. Preferably, the gene is absent from all of the foregoing evolutionarily closely related organisms.

B. Validating Gene Targets Identified In Silico

Once one or more mosquito-specific genes are identified according to one or more of the foregoing methods, functional nucleic acids can be designed to target the mosquito-specific genes. Desirable mosquito-specific genes can be selected when the functional nucleic acid is contacted with mosquitoes or mosquito cells, inhibits, reduces or prevent expression of the mosquito-specific gene, and leads to a desirable phenotype. Desirable phenotypes can be those that effect mosquito survival, fecundity, behavior, and/or vector status, and can target a range of pathways and functions including, but not limited to, morphogenesis, olfaction for host seeking and oviposition, blood feeding, digestion, reproduction, fertility, fecundity, embryogenesis, survival, insecticide resistance, larval development, pupal development, emergence, pathogen uptake, development, and/or transmission. Phenotypes and other molecular cues that can be used to screen for desirable phenotypes are well know in the art and exemplified below with respect egg maturation and embryogenesis.

Target genes identified in this manner can become targets of mosquito control compositions and methods analogous to those disclosed herein for targeting EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and/or DCE5 and eventually lead to a decrease in the mosquito population and thus lower the transmission of mosquito-borne viral infections.

### VI. Screens for Enzyme Inhibitors

Methods for identifying inhibitors of target proteins, particularly enzymes, suitable for use in accordance with the disclosed compositions are also provided.

Insecticide resistance by mosquitoes has been a serious problem worldwide. A new generation of environmentally safe insecticides will be important to control mosquito populations in areas of high rates of disease transmission. Screens are provided to focus on the characterization of evolutionarily-diverged, yet important, mosquito eggshell enzymes, which can be targeted by small molecule inhibitors with the potential to be next generation biosafe mosquitocides.

As illustrated in the experiments below, numerous new eggshell target proteins have been identified. For example, experiments show that evolutionarily-diverged Nude1 serine protease could be a potential downstream effector of EOF1, DCE2 enzymes are required for eggshell melanization and egg viability, and the evolutionarily-diverged protein most closely related to CATL3 cysteine proteases, plays a key role in ovarian follicles controlling eggshell melanization and dorso-ventral axis formation.

Thus, screening methods, preferably high throughput screening, of agents, preferably small molecule agents (e.g., small molecule libraries) to identify inhibitory molecules that target any of the disclosed proteins, and preferably DCE2, Nudel, or CATL3, most preferably Nude1 are provided.

Typically, recombinant protein is expressed in vitro. For example, biochemically active protein can be overexpressed in baculovirus insect cell expression system and in Escherichia coli.

In an exemplary protocol, DNA encoding the target protein can be codon-optimized for e.g., Trichoplusia ni. The protein encoding sequence is synthesized and inserted into an expression vector, e.g., the Bac-to-Bac® HT Vector (Thermo). The target protein expression vector can be co-transformed into E. coli competent cells, along with baculoviral DNA and helper DNA. After a transposition, the recombinant baculovirus containing DCE2 can be purified and transfected into, e.g., High Five™ Trichoplusia ni insect cell line (Thermo), which are preferred cells for secreted protein expression.

In another exemplary embodiment, DNA encoding the target protein and optionally a purification tag, e.g., an N-terminal 6× histidine tag, can be synthesized and cloned into e.g., the pET28b expression vector (Eurofins Genomics). These open reading frames can be E. coli codon-optimized in order to efficiently express in the bacterial system. Protein expression and enzyme activity assays can be improved by starting with ArcticExpress (Agilent) competent cells and altering the bacterial growth conditions to overexpress soluble and enzymatically-active target protein. Once soluble expression is achieved, the enzyme can be purified e.g., with a Nickel HisTRAP column using an AKTA Pure L1 FPLC.

Activation conditions can be tested using various pH buffer conditions, followed by activity and substrate specificity determination studies using enzyme substrates. Substrates may be commercially available and/or can be identified using proteomic, screening approaches such as those described in Bredemeyer, et al., PNAS, 101 (32) 11785-11790 (2004), Sandersjoo, et al., Biotechnol J., 12(1). doi: 10.1002/biot.201600365 (2017), or a screening service.

The soluble recombinant protein can be incubated in the reaction mixture with substrate, and enzymatic activity measured. A high throughput activity screening assay with automated handling of chemical samples can be performed (e.g., by Blomek FX (Beckman Coulter)). These studies can include measuring a change in absorbance over time using a microplate spectrophotometer as a reflection of enzyme activity.

Many high quality, small molecule libraries are commercially available and are suitable for the disclosed screens. Examples include EXPRESS-Pick Collection Stock and CORE library Stock from ChemBridge. See Dandapani S., Curr Protoc Chem Biol., 4:177-191 (2012) for examples of available small molecule libraries. It is contemplated that a high-throughput screening of small molecule libraries against target enzymes will identify inhibitory molecules, which can be further modified (e.g., to increase specificity and activity) if desired.

Promising inhibitory molecules can be further validated in secondary screens.

The positive compounds can be further evaluated for their effect on target protein activity and eggshell phenotypes using in vitro and/or in vivo assays, including any one or more of the assays described herein, and leading to any one or more of the phenotypes described herein. Assay may include, for example, microinjection and/or topical application of putative inhibitors to mosquitoes, particularly female mosquitoes. In some embodiments, putative inhibitors are tested for their effect on egg melanization, egg viability, oocyte permeability, or other egg or developmental phenotypes discussed herein, by applying or feeding the putative inhibitor to mosquitoes or applying it directly to eggs. In some embodiments, an inhibitor is selected when it generates an egg phenotype the same or similar to knockdown of EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and/or DCE5.

In some embodiments, the compounds are also tested on alternative species of mosquitoes, insects, and/or other animals including mammals such as mice and humans. In some embodiments, the compound that are insect-specific, mosquito-specific, and/or specific for a specific species or group of species of mosquitoes are selected. For example, in some embodiments, the compounds have reduced activity in mammals and/or other non-mosquito insects.

In some embodiments, putative protease inhibitors are tested for their effect on egg melanization, egg viability, oocyte permeability, or other egg or developmental phenotypes discussed herein, by applying or feeding the putative inhibitor to mosquitoes or applying it directly to eggs. In some embodiments, a putative protease inhibitor is selected when it generates an egg phenotype the same or similar to knockdown of EOF1, Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, Nudel, CATL3, DCE2, DCE4, and/or DCE5.

## EXAMPLES

### Example 1: EOF1 is an Important Protein for Viable Embryos

**Materials and Methods**

Mosquitoes

Most of the experiments were carried out using Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (Rockefeller strain) and reared as previously described (Isoe, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol 39(12):903-912 (2009)). For comparison, Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (Tucson strain) were colonized from Tucson, Ariz. (Brown, et al., J Med Entomol 54(2):489-491 (2016)). Aedes albopictus (Gainesville strain, MRA-804) was obtained from CDC/MR4. Using an artificial glass feeder, female mosquitoes were allowed to feed on an expired human blood donated by American Red Cross. Only fully engorged female mosquitoes were used.

Identification of Mosquito-Specific Putative Genes

Data mining and bioinformatic analysis were carried out using the GenBank database to identify putative protein-coding sequences that are only present in the genomes of Aedes, Culex, and Anopheles mosquitoes using a cut-off for expected value threshold of 1e-15. Mosquito-specific putative genes without corresponding mRNA in Ae. aegypti expressed sequence tags (EST) or expressed orthologs in the Ae. albopictus transcriptome shotgun assembly (TSA) database were excluded for further RNAi screening. Also excluded were genes that appear to be members of a multigene family due to possible functional redundancy with other gene family members.

dsRNA Synthesis and Microinjection

RNA interference (RNAi) was carried out to knock down Ae. aegypti mosquito genes. Each gene-specific forward and reverse oligonucleotide primer was designed using a NetPrimer web-based primer analysis tool. T7 RNA polymerase promoter sequence, TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGA (SEQ ID NO: 117), was added to the 5′ end of each primer (Table 2). All primers were purchased from Eurofins Genomics (Louisville, Ky.). PCR was performed using Taq 2× Master Mix (NEB, Ipswich, Mass.) with mosquito whole body cDNA as a template, and the amplified PCR products were cloned into the pGEM-T easy vector (Promega Madison, Wis.) for DNA sequence verification using an ABI 377 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif.). dsRNA was synthesized by in vitro transcription using HiScribe™ T7 Quick High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit (NEB). Cold anesthetized female mosquitoes were injected with 2.0 μg dsRNA using a Nanoject II microinjector (Drummond Scientific Company, Broomall, Pa.). Mosquitoes were maintained on 10% sucrose throughout the experiments.

Mosquito Egg Hatching Assay

Eggs laid on oviposition papers remained wet for three days before drying at 28° C. Eggs (about 7 days old) on oviposition paper were submerged in water, vacuumed using a Speed Vac for 10 minutes, and allowed to hatch for 2 days. First instar larvae were counted.

Bleach Assay

A bleach assay was performed to determine viability of 4-day old Ae. aegypti eggs from RNAi studies. Eggs on oviposition paper were soaked in 12% bleach at room temperature. A gradual progress of dechorionation of eggshell was observed under a microscope. Light microscopic images of eggs deposited from RNAi-Fluc and -EOF1 females prior to and after the addition of bleach were taken at X49 magnification (Nikon, SMZ-10A).

Statistical Analysis

Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism Software (GraphPad, La Jolla, Calif.). Statistical significance for fecundity, viability, and RNAi knockdown efficiency was analyzed using an unpaired Student's t-test. P values of ≤0.05 were considered significantly different. All experiments were performed from at least three independent cohorts.

**Results**

Data mining and bioinformatic analysis was performed using the GenBank database to identify putative protein-coding sequences that are only present in the genomes of Aedes, Culex, and Anopheles mosquitoes using a cut-off for expected value threshold of 1e-15. Importantly, the mosquito lineage-specific genes identified (Table 2) were found to be completely absent in evolutionarily closely related organisms, such as phantom midges, true midges, crane fly, and sandflies within the suborder Nematocera, and thus, these genes are not present in other known animals, plants, fungi, and bacteria species.

In order to focus on genes that are expressed and likely to encode proteins that could potentially serve as vector control targets, genes without corresponding mRNA in Ae. aegypti expressed sequence tags or expressed orthologs in the Ae. albopictus transcriptome shotgun assembly database were excluded. Also excluded were mosquito lineage-specific genes that appear to be members of a multigene family because RNAi knockdown phenotypes may not be immediately identifiable due to possible functional redundancy with other gene family members. This highly selected subset of hypothetical mosquito lineage-specific proteins may have therefore evolved independently and advantageously within the family Culicidae.

Systematic RNAi screening of mosquito-specific genes was performed by directly microinjecting the corresponding dsRNA into female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes 3 days prior to blood feeding (FIG. 1A), and the blood fed female mosquitoes were individually analyzed for their egg phenotypes, fecundity and viability. Among 40 mosquito-specific genes screened (Table 2), utilizing this experimental approach led to the identification of eggshell organizing factor 1 (EOF1, AAEL012336), which, upon RNAi knockdown, plays an important role in the strength and structural integrity of the forming eggshell, as well as its melanization.

To investigate if EOF1 has evolved within the family Culicidae to affect eggshell formation and melanization and therefore maximize egg survival, EOF1 was further characterized in mosquitoes. EOF1 sequences found in Aedes, Culex, and Anopheles mosquito species contain an F-box functional motif, and members of the F-box protein family are in general characterized by ˜50 amino acid F-box motif that interacts with a highly conserved SKP1 protein in the E3 ubiquitin ligase SCF complex (Wang, et al., Nat Rev Cancer 14(4):233-247 (2014)), indicating that EOF1 may function intracellularly. Recent proteomic analysis has identified over 100 mosquito eggshell proteins (Amenya, et al., J Insect Physiol 56(10):1414-1419 (2010), Marinotti, et al., BMC Dev Biol 2014, 14:15), and some of these proteins identified are enzymes that may potentially be involved in catalyzing eggshell melanization and cross-linking reactions (Ferdig, et. al., Insect Mol Biol 5(2):119-126 (1996), Han, et al., Arch Biochem Biophys 378(1):107-115 (2000), Johnson, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol, 31(11):1125-1135 (2001), Fang, et al., Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002, 290(1):287-293 (2002), Kim, et al., Insect Mol Biol 14(2):185-194 (2005), Li, et al., Protein Sci 14(9):2370-2386 (2005), Li, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol 36(12):954-964 (2006)). However, EOF1 was not previously identified in these mosquito eggshell proteomic studies, indicating that EOF1 may be an upstream regulatory factor of eggshell proteins.

The RNAi-EOF1 had a significant adverse impact on eggshell formation and egg viability. Single mosquito analysis showed that phenotypes associated with RNAi-EOF1 range from totally non-melanized, collapsed to truncated, melanized eggs, while untreated and RNAi-Fluc control laid eggs that exhibit uniformly elongated and melanized patterns. Single mosquito analysis also showed that fecundity and viability from eggs of RNAi-EOF1 females are strongly affected by reduced EOF1 function through RNAi (FIGS. 1B and 1C). A bleach test was performed to determine viability of 4-day old eggs from RNAi studies, and confirmed that mosquito-specific EOF1 is required for embryonic development in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (FIG. 1D). Light microscopic images were taken from RNAi-Fluc and -EOF1 females immediately prior to the addition of bleach (0 min). Partially melanized eggs were frequently observed from EOF1 deficient mosquitoes collapsed prior to bleach application. Representative photos were taken 2, 50, 60, 70, and 80 min post bleach application. The exochorionic structures including exochorionic network become invisible immediately upon bleach application (2 min). Eyes of the first instar larvae present in eggs, indicated with white circles, have begun to appear through the partially dechorionated eggshell at 50 min post-bleach application, while weakly melanized eggs from EOF1-deficient mosquito disappeared. Eggshell was nearly removed by 80 min after bleach treatment, exposing the fully developed first instar larvae. Bleach treatment (10%) gently dechorionates eggshell with minimal adverse effects on the embryos due to the presence of the extraembryonic serosal cuticle. Overall, the bleach studies showed that eggs from RNAi-Fluc mosquitoes had 92.2% of developed first instar larvae, while 1.8% of egg deposited by RNAi-EOF1 mosquitoes successfully completed embryogenesis to reach the first larval instar (FIG. 1D). The mean±SEM are shown as horizontal lines, and the statistical significance is represented by stars above each column (unpaired Student's t test; ***P<0.001). Eggs were observed using a light microscope at X49 magnification (Nikon, SMZ-10A).

In the majority of eggs laid by EOF1-deficient mosquitoes, embryos fail to complete embryogenesis and reach the first larval instar. A recently colonized Ae. aegypti Tucson strain from wild populations (Brown, et al., J Med Entomol, 54(2):489-491 (2016)) also exhibited similar defective egg and embryo phenotypes associated with RNAi-EOF1. Thus, EOF1 protein is important for complete eggshell formation and embryonic development in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes.

Anautogenous female mosquitoes can undergo multiple gonotrophic cycles by repeating blood feeding, vitellogenesis, and oviposition events. Because EOF1 plays an important role in eggshell formation, experiments were designed to investigate how long the RNAi knockdown effect of EOF1 lasts from a single dsRNA microinjection. The effect of EOF1 deficiency on eggs was examined in three consecutive gonotrophic cycles in individual containers. Eggshell melanization, fecundity (FIG. 2B), and viability (FIG. 2C) phenotypes are profoundly altered in EOF1-deficient mosquitoes during the first three gonotrophic cycles. Therefore, the data demonstrate that the RNAi-EOF1 effect from a single dsRNA injection remains substantial for the second and even the third gonotrophic cycles.

Furthermore, the timing of dsRNA microinjection is important. The dsRNA has to be microinjected few days prior to blood feeding in both the first and second gonotrophic cycles in order to induce RNAi-mediated EOF1 depletion and produce defective egg phenotypes (FIG. 2D-2O). Mosquitoes injected with dsRNA-EOF1 at one day after adult eclosion produced inviable eggs (FIGS. 2D-2F). Mosquitoes were also injected with dsRNA-EOF1 immediately after blood feeding. These females laid eggs that show no difference in fecundity and viability compared to RNAi-Fluc control mosquitoes (FIG. 2G-2I). Mosquitoes injected with dsRNA-EOF1 48 hours post blood meal and before oviposition oviposited normal eggs (FIG. 2J-2L). Mosquitoes injected with dsRNA-EOF1 at one day after oviposition resulted in the production of inviable eggs (FIG. 2M-2O).

### Example 2: EOF1 Expression Pattern

**Materials and Methods**

Pattern of EOF1 Gene Expression by qPCR

Using TRIzol reagent, total RNA was extracted from larvae, pupae and male adults as well as five tissues including thorax, fat body, midgut, ovaries, and Malpighian tubules dissected from sugar-fed at 3 day post eclosion and blood-fed female mosquitoes at 24 and 48 h PBM. First strand cDNA was synthesized from pools of total RNA using an oligo-(dT)20 primer and reverse transcriptase. qPCR was carried out with the corresponding cDNA, EOF1 or Ribosomal protein S7 gene-specific primers (Table 3), PerfeCTa SYBR Green FastMix, and ROX (Quanta BioSciences, Gaithersburg, Md.) on the 7300 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems).

Preparation of Enriched Mosquito Eggshell

Female mosquitoes were injected with dsRNA at 1 day post adult emergence, and ovaries were dissected in 1×PBS at 96 hour PBM. The dissected ovaries were thoroughly homogenized (40 strokes) in ice cold 1×PBS using Dounce homogenizers (B pestle). The eggshells were allowed to settle down to the bottom of the homogenizer on ice. The top cloudy fraction was gently aspirated, and the washing step with ice cold 1×PBS for the eggshells was repeated four times or until the solution was completely cleared.

Subsequently, the eggshell was homogenized (20 strokes) in ice cold 1×PBS using A pestle. The eggshell proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE and stained with GelCode Blue reagent.

SDS-PAGE and Western Blot Analysis

Mosquito ovaries were dissected in 1×PBS under a dissecting microscope and homogenized in lysis buffer (12 mM sodium deoxycholate, 0.2% SDS, 1% triton X-100, complete mini-EDTA-free protease inhibitor, Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, Ind.). Protein extracts were resolved on SDS-PAGE using a 12% acrylamide separation gel and a 3% stacking gel. The resolved proteins were either stained with GelCode Blue reagent (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Mass.) or electrophoretically blotted to a nitrocellulose membrane (LI-COR, Lincoln, Nebr.) for Western Blot analysis. The membranes were blocked with 4% nonfat dry milk and incubated with each primary antibody in 4% non-fat milk in PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20. The EOF1 rabbit polyclonal antibody was generated by GenScript Corporation (Piscataway, N.J.) based on an antigenic peptide (LAPNSPSKEDEPAH). The anti-α-tubulin monoclonal antibody from Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank (University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa) was used as loading controls for ovaries. The dilutions of the primary antibodies were as follows: EOF1 (1:3,000) and α-tubulin (1:2,000). The secondary antibodies were either IRDye 800CW goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:10,000; LI-COR) or IRDye 800CW goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (1:10,000; LI-COR). The protein bands were visualized with an Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LI-COR).

Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH)

mRNA distribution of EOF1 and vitelline envelopes (15a1, 15a2, and 15a3) in Ae. aegypti primary follicles was determined using whole-mount fluorescent in situ hybridization. Primary follicles were isolated from ovaries of untreated female mosquitoes at 36 hours PBM fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. After washing with 1×PBS, the follicle samples were dehydrated with ethanol (ETOH) in water through a graded series for 10 min each in 10, 30, 50, 70, 90% ETOH and 3 times 30 min each in 100% ETOH at room temperature. The samples were hydrated with 1×PBS in ETOH through a graded.

Measuring Knockdown Efficiency of RNAi-EOF1

Knockdown efficiency of RNAi was verified by real-time qPCR using gene-specific primers (Table 3). cDNA was synthesized from DNase I-treated total RNA isolated from ovaries of individual dsRNA-injected mosquitoes at 48 hours PBM. Normalization was done using the ribosomal protein S7 transcript levels as an internal control, and the knockdown efficiency of RNAi-EOF1 was compared using Fluc dsRNA injected mosquitoes as a control. RNAi knockdown level of EOF1 protein was also determined by Western Blot analysis using an EOF1-specific polyclonal antibody.

Ovarian protein extracts were isolated from 8 individual mosquitoes from RNAi-Fluc or RNAi-EOF1 mosquitoes at 48 hours PBM. α-tubulin was used as an internal control.

Results Since little is known about this mosquito-specific EOF1 gene except for the phenotypes associated with RNAi, the expression pattern of EOF1 was investigated at the mRNA level in untreated Ae. aegypti by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). Five tissues including thorax, fat body, midgut, ovaries, and Malpighian tubules were dissected from sugar-fed at 3 day post eclosion and blood-fed female mosquitoes at 24 and 48 h PBM. The mRNA expression in whole body of mixed sex samples of 4th instar larvae and pupae and adult male mosquitoes was also investigated. EOF1 is predominantly expressed in ovaries, and the expression is upregulated in the ovaries by blood feeding (FIG. 3A).

qPCR results also indicate that mRNA encoding EOF1 is not strongly detected from larvae, pupae and adult male mosquitoes. Next, the pattern of EOF1 expression during the first gonotrophic cycle was examined in detail. Ovaries were isolated at various time points PBM. In ovary samples after 36 h PBM, the primary follicles were carefully isolated from ovaries to exclude non-follicle ovarian cell types such as muscles and trachea. qPCR data show that EOF1 mRNA expression is up-regulated in response to blood feeding, and the levels remain even high at 14 days PBM (FIG. 3B). Since follicular epithelial cells and nurse cells in the primary follicles undergo apoptosis by around 72 h PBM, mRNAs encoding EOF1 may likely originate from the unfertilized mature oocytes. EOF1 mRNA distribution in primary follicles was further determined using whole-mount Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). FISH analysis shows that while three vitelline envelope genes (Edwards, et al., Insect Biochem Mol Biol 28(12):915-925 (1998)) were exclusively expressed in the follicular epithelial cells, EOF1 mRNA transcripts are present in oocyte and nurse cells of primary follicles and weakly expressed in the secondary follicle, while mRNAs encoding three vitelline envelope proteins are restricted in follicular epithelial cells of primary follicles. Western blot protein analysis confirmed that EOF1 expression is induced in ovaries in response to blood feeding.

RNAi knockdown level of EOF1 mRNA and protein was confirmed by qPCR and Western Blot, respectively (FIG. 3C). Single mosquito qPCR analysis was performed to measure the relative RNAi knockdown level of EOF1 transcript in ovaries. Mosquitoes were microinjected with 2.2 μg of dsRNA-EOF1 or -Fluc three days prior to blood feeding, and a pair of ovaries was dissected from 13 individual mosquitoes from both groups at 48 hours PBM. EOF1 transcript levels were normalized to S7 ribosomal protein transcript levels in the same cDNA samples (FIG. 3C).

### Example 3: Follicle Development in EOF1-Deficient Females

**Materials and Methods**

Apoptosis Assay for Ovarian Follicles Using Confocal Laser Microscopy

Female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes were microinjected with dsRNA at 1 day post adult emergence, and ovaries at 36 hour PBM were removed in 1× PBS under a dissecting microscope and immediately incubated with tissue culture media (Medium 199, Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing a caspase inhibitor (SR FLICA® Poly Caspase Assay Kit, ImmunoChemistry Technologies, Bloomington, Minn.) at 37° C. in the dark for 1 hour. The ovaries were washed with 1×PBS, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, quenched with 25 mM glycine, permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X100, and stained with Acti-stain 488 phalloidin (Cytoskeleton Inc, Denver, Colo.) overnight at 4° C. After washing with 1×PBS, the whole ovaries were mounted on a glass slide using ProLong Gold Antifade reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Immunofluorescence and light microscopic images of the ovaries were captured using a Spinning Disk Confocal Laser Microscope (Intelligent Imaging Innovations, Denver, Colo.) in the Keck Imaging Center at the University of Arizona.

Rhodamine B and Neutral Red Mosquito Follicle Permeability Assay

The assay has an advantage that it can quickly assess whether follicles within the ovaries may contain defective eggshell prior to oviposition. Individual follicles of untreated, RNAi-Fluc, or -EOF1 mosquitoes at 96 hour PBM were dissected and gently separated from the ovaries, and transferred to glass scintillation vials. Rhodamine B (final concentration of 1 mM in H2O, Sigma) and neutral red (0.5%, Sigma) was used to stain primary follicles for 10 min on a rocking shaker and thoroughly rinsed with H2O. The stained primary follicles were photographed with a Coolpix 4300 (Nikon).

**Results**

EOF1-deficient female mosquitoes had low fecundity (FIG. 1B) and laid eggs that are defective in eggshell formation, leading to the embryonic lethal phenotype (FIG. 1C). Experiments were designed to determine if primary follicles of EOF1-deficient mosquitoes undergo cell death, removing severely affected follicles within the ovaries. Ovarian follicle phenotypes associated with EOF1 gene suppression were examined by RNAi in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes. Representative ovaries at 36 h PBM showed that RNAi-EOF1 ovaries contain follicles that undergo caspase-mediated apoptosis, while these dying follicles were not observed in untreated or RNAi-Fluc control ovaries. The caspase activity was also observed to be more concentrated in the oocytes than in the follicular epithelial cells.

*Representative mature ovaries were dissected from abdomen of dsRNA injected mosquitoes and photographed at 96 h PBM. While all RNAi-Fluc control mature follicles in ovaries have not initiated melanization, it was frequently observed that some follicles isolated from RNAi-EOF1 were already partially melanized in the ovaries. The partially melanized phenotype in EOF1-deficient ovaries was accompanied by a loss of structural integrity, and thus it was believed that decreased chorionic osmotic control results in this alteration of egg shape. To determine whether the water permeability of the mosquito eggshells was affected in response to EOF1 knockdown, two chemical markers, rhodamine B and neutral red, were employed to stain ovarian follicles. Significant differences in the permeability of both markers in ovaries were observed. While the follicles from both untreated and RNAi-Fluc mosquitoes were only slightly stained, the majority of follicles from RNAi-EOF1 mosquitoes were strongly stained with the markers. Since follicular epithelial cells have been already shed around 72 h PBM, there is a single oocyte present in each follicle at this developmental stage (96 h PBM). The reduction of EOF1 expression in female mosquitoes resulted in defective eggshells, leading to increased permeability of water into oocytes and altered follicular shape.

### Example 4: Ultrastructure Analysis of Mosquito Eggs

**Materials and Methods**

Ultrastructural Study of Eggshell by SEM

The ovaries were dissected from mosquitoes injected with Fluc control dsRNA and EOF1 dsRNA at 96 h PBM. Each follicle was carefully separated from the ovaries in 1×PBS under a dissecting microscope. The mature follicles were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M PIPES for 1 hour at room temperature and washed twice in PIPES. The follicles were then post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide in PIPES for 1 hour and washed twice in deionized water for 10 min each. The follicles were dehydrated with ethanol (ETOH) in water through a graded series for 10 min each in 10, 30, 50, 70, 90% ETOH and 3 times 30 min each in 100% ETOH at room temperature. The samples were dried with hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS, Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, Pa.) in ETOH through a graded series for 20 min each in 25, 50, 75, and 100% HMDS at room temperature. The follicle samples were air-dried under a fume hood overnight at room temperature for SEM analysis. The dried samples were metallized with gold using Hummer 6.2 Sputter System (Anatech USA, Union City, Calif.). Inspect-S scanning electron microscope (FEI, Hillsboro, Oreg.) was used to compare the ultrastructural characteristics of the ovarian follicles of females injected with Fluc and EOF1 dsRNA.

**Results**

EOF1-deficient mosquitoes oviposited eggs with different degrees of eggshell melanization phenotypes that include non-melanized, partially melanized and melanized eggs. Since nearly 100% of eggs oviposited from RNAi-EOF1 females did not undergo complete embryogenesis (FIGS. 1C and 2C), it was believed that the defective eggshell may be the primary cause of embryonic death. Light microscopy images of eggs from Ae. aegypti RNAi-Fluc and -EOF1 mosquitoes revealed that EOF1 may be involved in the specification of the outer chorionic area (OCA) surrounded by the exochorionic network (EN). Next, the effect of RNAi-EOF1 on the ultrastructure of eggs was examined in detail by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). A very similar Ae. aegypti eggshell ultrastructure to other SEM studies was observed (Suman, et al., Arthropod Struct Dev 40(5):479-483 (2011), Faull, et al., Arthropod Struct Dev 45(3):273-280 (2016)). An exochorion outermost layer of the eggshell is characterized by the presence of a single protruding central tubercle (CT) and several peripheral minute tubercles (PT) in the OCA. However, SEM images showed that OCA in RNAi-EOF1 eggs is about 6 times larger than eggs of control mosquitoes, indicating that EOF1 may be involved in specifying the size of OCA. Each OCA also contained multiple miniaturized CT-like structures also surrounded by EN-like structures instead of one predominant CT. Thus, EOF1 may act as an upstream factor to control eggshell surface patterning in Ae. aegypti.

Through RNAi screening of putative mosquito-specific genes in Ae. aegypti, EOF1 was identified as an important protein for eggshell formation and melanization. Since eggshell components are directly secreted into the extracellular space between the oocyte and the surrounding follicular epithelial cells, intimate communication between these cells within each ovariole may exist throughout the follicle maturation, eventually leading to follicular epithelial cell shedding, ovulation, and oviposition. In general, mature follicles from mosquitoes do not undergo premature melanization within the ovaries, and gravid females can hold their mature follicles for a long period of time under adverse environmental conditions and still lay viable eggs which become melanized after oviposition. Thus, the timing of eggshell melanization may likely be tightly regulated and catalyzed by specific enzymes, and their synthesis, secretion, and activation may be important for proper melanization and thus survival of embryos.

A possible explanation for aberrant partial melanization of follicles within the EOF1-deficient ovaries prior to an oviposition event is that a loss of EOF1 function may alter hemolymph permeability of eggshell, affecting a delicate chemical balance within the oocytes, which in turn trigger other eggshell components to prematurely initiate eggshell melanization processes. In addition to Ae. aegypti, EOF1 was confirmed to play an important role in eggshell formation in Ae. albopictus (FIGS. 4A and 4B). Mosquitoes were injected with dsRNA at one day after adult eclosion, and the effect of RNAi-EOF1 or -Fluc control on Ae. albopictus fecundity (FIG. 4A) was examined by counting the number of eggs laid by each individual female. Knockdown of EOF1 in Ae. albopictus females led to the production of non-melanized abnormal eggs. Note that 55.9% of fully bloodfed RNAi-EOF1 females did not produce mature follicles, and the results are not included in the analysis. Viability of these eggs was also determined (FIG. 4B).

SDS-PAGE analysis shows that enriched eggshell proteins from EOF1 deficient eggs slightly differ those from RNAi-Fluc control, and thus an identification of the downstream EOF1-dependent eggshell proteins may lead to a better understanding of molecular mechanisms for mosquito eggshell formation. Based on the presence of a conserved F-box motif in EOF1, one possibility is that EOF1 is required in the ubiquitin pathway for controlled degradation of one or more proteins that regulate proper timing of eggshell development. Dysregulation of stage-specific ordered events in RNAi-EOF1 injected mosquitoes could lead to collapse of the developmental program at all downstream control points. The finding that RNAi-EOF1 phenotypes are observed three gonotrophic cycles beyond the time of injection, indicates that the EOF1 protein may not be resynthesized at the onset of each gonotrophic cycle, but rather establishes the eggshell development program when the reproductive phase is initiated in the female mosquito. Another possibility is that RNAi effects are particularly long-lasting in ovary tissues and continue to abrogate EOF1 synthesis at each gonotrophic cycle.

### Example 5: Nasrat, Closca, Polehole and Nude1 are Important Eggshell Proteins

**Materials and Methods**

DsRNA synthesis and microinjection, mosquito egg hatching assay, qPCR, SDS-PAGE and western blot, Rhodamine B follicle permeability assay, microscopy, and statistical analysis were performed generally as described above in Examples 1-4, except using gene-specific primers for qPCR and dsRNA template synthesis by PCR for the new targets.

In Vitro Mosquito Follicle Melanization Assays RNAi

Briefly, ovaries were dissected from these dsRNA injected mosquitoes at 96 h post blood meal. The mature follicles were isolated from the ovaries, transferred to oviposition paper wetted with water, and photographed periodically to determine a time required for eggshell melanization.

Protease Inhibitor

Ovaries from female mosquitoes at 96 hours PBM were dissected and placed in water containing protease inhibitors at different time after ovary dissection. Individual follicles were then separated, transferred onto oviposition paper, continuously soaked with water containing the protease inhibitors, and monitored for eggshell melanization. The control follicles were soaked with water without protease inhibitors.

Eggshell Isolation and Eggshell Protein Identification

dsRNA samples were microinjected into the mosquito thorax three days prior to blood feeding. dsRNA injected mosquitoes were allowed to feed on blood until fully engorged. Ovaries were dissected from dsRNA injected mosquitoes 4 days post blood meal. Primary follicles were purified from dissected ovaries. The primary follicles were homogenized using a dounce homogenizer to remove oocyte cytosolic and membrane contents, and eggshell was filtered through a mesh strainer (40 μm) to obtain enriched eggshell. Trypsin-digested eggshell proteins were subjected to LC-MS/MS using the Q Exactive™ hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

**Results**

Since EOF-1 is expressed in the mosquito ovaries, but is not itself a component of the mature eggshell, experiments were designed to test if EOF-1 is a regulatory protein that controls the synthesis and secretion of eggshell proteins from follicular epithelial cells. Indeed, SDS PAGE analysis of eggshell proteins demonstrated that eggshells produced by EOF1 deficient mosquitoes lack certain high molecular weight proteins (over 200 kD) compared to eggshells produced by control mosquitoes, which may represent downstream targets in an EOF1-regulated pathway.

An RNAi screen was performed to identify new important eggshell proteins in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. Mosquitoes were either untreated (uninjected control) or injected with RNAi targeting 32 eggshell genes, firefly luciferase (injected control), or EOF1 (AAEL012336). Results of the screen indicated that RNAi against AAEL000961, AAEL002196, AAEL006830, AAEL007096, AAEL008829, and AAEL010848 resulted in defective eggshells compared to untreated (uninjected) control (see Table 5).

To further explore this possibility, RNAi knockdown analysis of six genes encoding eggshell proteins with high molecular weight was performed to determine if deficiencies in these proteins phenocopy the EOFI deficient phenotype of producing defective eggshells. It was observed that RNAi against nasrat (248 kD), closca (264 kD), polehole (214 kD) and nudel (285 kD) resulted in significant loss of egg melanization and embryo viability phenotypes (FIG. 5C-5D), which are similar phenotypes observed in EOF1-deficient eggs. All four of these proteins have been studied in Drosophila melanogaster, which showed that nasrat, closca, and polehole are structural proteins that associated with a nudel serine protease in the perivitelline space (between eggshell and oocyte plasma membrane) of developing ovarian follicles.

Mosquito nasrat, closca, pole hole, and nudel proteins have diverged significantly from D. melanogaster orthologs (below 30% sequence identity), indicating that their functional overlap is not conserved structurally and thereby provides an opportunity for mosquito-selective targeting.

The tissue-specific and developmental expression pattern of these genes during the first gonotrophic cycle was investigated at the mRNA level in untreated Ae. aegypti by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). Five tissues including thorax, fat body, midgut, ovaries, and Malpighian tubules were dissected from sugar-fed only (SF) and blood-fed mosquitoes at 24 and 48 hours post blood meal (PBM). The mRNA expression in larvae, pupae and adult male mosquitoes was also investigated. The tissue expression study demonstrated that Nasrat, Closca, and Polehole were predominantly expressed in ovaries, while Nude1 transcripts were significantly observed in whole body male mosquitoes (FIGS. 6A-6D).

To further explore the effects of timing of dsRNA injection on phenotype, the reproductive phenotypes associated with RNAi treatment immediately after feeding in the first gonotrophic cycle were investigated (FIG. 7A). It was observed that female mosquitoes with dsRNA-Nasrat, -Closca, or -Polehole laid eggs that showed no difference in fecundity (FIG. 7B), melanization (FIG. 7C), and viability (FIG. 7D) compared to RNAi-Fluc control mosquitoes. However, females microinjected with dsRNA-Nude1 immediately after blood feeding showed adversely affected eggshell melanization and viability (FIGS. 7C-7D).

It was observed that eggs from the second gonotrophic cycle were not affected when females were microinjected with dsRNA-Nude1 prior or at the blood feeding. In contrast to the first gonotrophic cycle, dsRNA-Nude1 did not significantly affect melanization (FIG. 8C) and viability (FIG. 8D) of eggs in the second gonotrophic cycle.

RNAi-Nude1 Ae. aegypti female mosquitoes laid melanization defective eggs, thus leading to embryonic death. Experiments were designed to test a model in which activation of Nude1 serine protease in wildtype mosquitoes is tightly regulated in time and space in eggs such that Nude1 in eggshell may be inactive prior to oviposition and becomes active as soon as female mosquitoes oviposit eggs in order to proteolytically regulate enzymes involved in the melanization and cross-linking. In vitro mosquito follicle melanization experiments were designed to determine the time required for melanization of primary follicles isolated from RNAi-mosquitoes.

Thus, to further investigate the effects of RNAi-Nasrat, -Closca, -Polehole, and -Nudel, an in vitro follicle melanization assay was conducted using follicles isolated from RNAi mosquitoes at 96 hours PBM Timing of dsRNA microinjection and blood feeding were identical to those shown in FIG. 5A. The follicles were photographed 5, 70 and 120 minutes after follicle dissection. Compared to Fluc control, individual knockdown of Nasrat, Closca, Polehole and Nude1 was observed to significantly reduce egg melanization, with Nude1 knockdown demonstrating the largest reduction (FIG. 9A). Melanization of follicles from RNAi-Fluc controls was initiated approximately at 70 min and completed by approximately 3 hours after the ovary dissection. In contrast, the majority of follicles from RNAi against Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, and Nude1 mosquitoes did not undergo melanizataion within 3-hours experimental period and never further melanized even at 24 hours after the beginning of experiments, indicating that proteolytic activity of Nude1 serine protease may be needed for eggshell melanization in mosquitoes.

Next, experiments were designed to test whether active protease(s) are important during eggshell melanization. To determine a role of proteases on eggshell melanization, an in vitro follicle melanization assay was performed using a protease inhibitor cocktail (PI) (PI, Complete Mini, EDTA-free, Roche). Dissected matured mosquito follicles were treated with protease inhibitors. Follicles were incubated with PI at 0, 10, or 20 minutes after follicle dissection. The follicles were photographed 5, 70 and 120 min after the follicle dissection. Compared to untreated control, a significant reduction in egg melanization was only observed upon immediate treatment with PI after follicle dissection (i.e., the 0 minute time point; FIG. 9B).

The protease inhibitor cocktail totally inhibited melanization of wild-type mature follicles only when they were treated with PI (PI, Complete Mini, EDTA-free, Roche) during dissection. On the contrary, the cohort follicles treated with PI at 10 or 20 min after dissection were able to undergo normal eggshell melanization, which is similar to those control wild-type follicles soaked with water without PI. Thus, some proteases present in eggshell are likely important and activated immediately after contacting with water in order to regulate enzymes necessary for eggshell melanization in Ae. aegypti. Thus, it was concluded that Nude1 protease may play a significant role in mosquito eggshell melanization.

To determine whether the water permeability of the mosquito eggshells was affected in response to Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, or Nude1 knockdown, a rhodamine B permeability assay was employed to stain ovarian follicles. Significant differences in the permeability were observed. The follicle permeability assay showed that a strong Rhodamine B cellular uptake was observed in primary follicles isolated from RNAi-Nasrat, -Closca, -Polehole, and -Nude1 female mosquitoes, whereas the follicles from RNAi-Fluc control mosquitoes were not stained.

Polehole, Nasrat, Closca, and Nude1 protein expressions (Eggshell peptide abundance fold changes) were also analyszed in response to RNAi-EOF1 (AAEL012336) in comparison with RNAi-Fluc control (FIG. 10).

Collectively, these results indicate that Nasrat, Closca, Polehole, and Nude1 are important for eggshell melanization and oocyte membrane permeability.

Based on the above results, a three-stage model for involvement of specific proteins during eggshell formation and melanization in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes is proposed (FIG. 11). In stage A, a primary follicle in the ovariole reaches maturity, and an extracellular eggshell matrix completely forms between oocyte and follicular epithelial cells around 48 hours post blood meal (PBM). Enzymes involved in eggshell melanization and cross-linking may be likely inactive. In stage B, as the follicles initiate migration into an inner oviduct, the surrounding follicular epithelia shed with the secondary follicle and germarium in the ovariole. The enzymes involved in eggshell melanization and cross-linking may be still inactive forms within the inner, lateral, and common oviducts. In stage C, once the eggs are deposited onto a dump substrate, eggs briefly uptake surrounding water and activate the melanization and cross-linking enzymes through the activity of Nude1 and/or CATL3.

It is believed that the Ae. aegypti nudel serine protease associates with the nasrat, closca, and polehole structural proteins in a common pathway that is itself controlled by EOF1. Inhibitor assays confirmed that proteases, e.g., serine proteases, are necessary for initiating melanization processes in Ae. aegypti mosquito eggs. It is believed that the Ae. aegypti nudel serine protease may function in a nasrat/closca/polehole protein complex to proteolytically regulate activities of secreted downstream target enzymes in the eggshell, including prophenol oxidases, dopachrome conversion enzymes, laccase, chorion peroxidases, and transglutaminases, which are known to be directly involved in mosquito eggshell maturation. It is contemplated that small inhibitory molecules targeting highly diverged mosquito nudel protease can be used in compositions and methods to specifically and safely control mosquito populations.

Unless defined otherwise, all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meanings as commonly understood by one of skill in the art to which the disclosed invention belongs. Publications cited herein and the materials for which they are cited are specifically incorporated by reference.

Those skilled in the art will recognize, or be able to ascertain using no more than routine experimentation, many equivalents to the specific embodiments of the invention described herein. Such equivalents are intended to be encompassed by the following claims.

