# Materials

In(III)Cl3 (99.999+%), tris(trimethylsilyl) arsenide (TMS3As), trioctylphosphine (TOP, 90%; purified by vacuum distillation and kept in the glovebox), AuCl3 (99%), AgCl (99+%), AgNO3 (99+%), CuCl2 (99.999%), dodecylamine (DDA, 98%), didodecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDAB, 98%), toluene (99.8% anhydrous), methanol (99.8% anhydrous). All chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich except for (TMS3As) which was synthesized as detailed in the literature (1).

## Methods

### InAs Nanocrystal Synthesis

The synthesis of InAs nanocrystals (NCs) is based on the literature procedure (2) and is carried out under an inert atmosphere using standard Schlenck techniques. In a typical synthesis a mixture of indium and arsenic precursors is prepared by adding 0.3g (1mmol) of (TMS3As) to 1.7g of a 1.4M InCl3 TOP solution (2mmol in total). 1ml of this solution is injected into a three neck-flask containing 2ml of TOP at 300°C under vigorous stirring. The temperature is then reduced to 260°C and further precursor solution is added in order to achieve particle growth. The growth was monitored by taking the absorption spectra of aliquots extracted from the reaction solution. Upon reaching the desired size, the reaction mixture was allowed to cool to room temperature and was transferred into the glovebox. Anhydrous toluene was added to the reaction solution, and the nanocrystals were precipitated by adding anhydrous methanol. The size distribution of the nanocrystals in a typical reaction was on the order of 10%. This was improved using size selective precipitation with toluene and methanol as the solvent and anti-solvent, respectively.

#### Metal-atom Doping Method

In a typical reaction a metal solution is prepared by dissolving 10mg of the metal salt (CuCl2, AgNO3, AgCl or AuCl3), 80mg DDAB and 120mg of DDA in 10ml of toluene. The Cu and Ag solutions prepared in this manner are respectively blue, colorless and yellow. The metal solution is then added drop-wise to a stirred 2ml toluene solution of InAs NCs. After 15 minutes the absorption and emission of the solutions are measured. The Cu and Au samples are precipitated with methanol whilst the Ag sample is precipitated with acetone. The entire metal treatment procedure is carried out under inert conditions. The ratio of metal atoms to NCs in solution is estimated from the literature values of InAs NC absorption cross-sections (3).

#### Instrument Specifications & Sample Preparation

UV-Visible-Near IR Spectroscopy was performed on a JASCO V-570 spectrometer using glass cuvettes. The photoluminescence (PL) measurement with an Ocean-optics NIR-512 spectrophotometer using 633nm HeNe laser excitation. Transmission Electron Microscopy was performed on Tecnai T12 G2 Spirit at 120 keV. TEM grids were prepared by evaporating one drop of the metal treated NC solution onto a standard carbon covered grid. This was followed by washing the grid with several drops of methanol for Cu and Au samples and acetone for Ag samples.

Powder X-ray Diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using Cu Kα photons from a Phillips PW1830/40 diffractometer operated at 40 kV and 30 mA. Samples were deposited as a thin layer on a low-background scattering quartz substrate. The data presented has undergone a background subtraction. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out with a Kratos Analytical Axis Ulta XPS instrument. Data were obtained with Al KR radiation (1486.6eV). Survey spectra were collected with 160eV pass energy detection. The measurements were performed on nanocrystal films of monolayer thickness deposited on a Si wafer. ICP-AES measurements were carried out using a Perkin-Elmer Optima 3000. Emission from In ions was measured at 230.6nm and 325.6nm, Emission from As ions was measured at 189.0nm 193.7nm. Cu, Ag and Au emission was measured at 324.8nm, 328.1nm and 208.2nm respectively. The sample preparation procedure is described later.

#### Detailed Spectra of Samples During the Doping Procedure

The treatment of the InAs NCs with the Cu solution leads to an increase in the first exciton energy (see Figure S1 panels a-c) while the emission energy is unchanged (see Figure S1  panels d-f). Ag treatment leads to a decrease both in the first exciton energy, see Figure S2 panels a and b and the emission energy (see Figure S2) panels c and d. All the metal treatments result in some quenching of the emission. This is totally quenched after precipitation.  

##### Determination of Metal Impurity Concentration by ICP-AES (Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy) Measurements

In order to estimate the number of metal atoms per NC, metal treatment was carried out as described above on a range of NC sizes and at different metal concentrations. The NCs were then precipitated, dissolved using concentrated HNO3 and diluted with triply distilled water. The relative quantities of In, As, Cu, Ag and Au in these solutions was measured by ICP-AES. The amount of Cu/Ag/Au per NC was extrapolated using the ratio of In and As to Cu/Ag/Au atoms together with the estimated number of In and As atoms per NC estimated from the NC size. The results are shown for Cu and Ag in Figure S3 and Figure S5. These graphs represent the number of metal atoms per NC extrapolated from the ICP measurements against the metal:NC solution ratio.

Figure S3. The number of Cu atoms per NC. Extracted values from ICP measurements against the Cu:NC solution ratio for NCs with diameters of 2.7nm (Black), 3.3nm (Red), 3.6nm (Green) and 4.1nm (Blue).

Figure S3 shows the dependence of the number of Cu atoms per NC on the Cu:NC solution ratio. For each size the results were fitted and the interpolated relationship was used to calibrate the number of Cu atoms per NC reported here. Figure S4 is an example of a fit for the data of 3.6nm diameter NCs. In this case the data was separated into two regions which had linear fits applied.  The number of Ag atoms per NC on the Ag:NC solution ratio showed two regimes as can be seen in Figure S5. For the purpose of calibration these regions were fitted separately an example of which is shown in Figure S6. Similar fits were calculated for all particle sizes and the results were used to calibrate the number of Ag per NC reported here. Similar analysis was undertaken for Au.  characterization. This included TEM imaging, sizing, and XRD and XPS measurements. As can be seen in Figure S8b-d metal domains on the surface of the NPs are not observed.  Figure S10 shows the XRD diffractograms of samples 1-3. It is clearly seen that in both the Cu and Ag samples the main InAs reflections are present which indicates that the InAs crystal structure is generally preserved. It should be noted that evidence for disorder is seen in broadening of the peaks at higher angles, and also specifically for Cu, a tail appears around 2 30°. 

#### The effect of the Impurity Atom on the Lattice Parameter

With regards to lattice distortions or changes as a result of substitutional doping, we analyze below the possible change in the lattice parameter. We shall apply the analysis to Ag, the largest impurity, as an upper limit of the changes. The addition of an impurity atom in a substitutional lattice site may result in the expansion or contraction of the lattice parameter, a. The change in the lattice parameter, a  , is expressed by:

Where i N is the impurity concentration and  is the expansion or contraction coefficient.  can in turn be calculated using the covalent radii of the impurity, i r host atom, h r and the density of host atoms h N (4).

Using the Pauli tetrahedral covalent radii along with the following values in conjunction with equations ( 1) and ( 2) at an assumed doping level of 10%: This is a difference of less than 1% from the original lattice parameter. The Debye-Scherrer broadening of the NC XRD signal will mask a shift in the reflection angle caused by such a small change in the lattice parameter, and we do not observe the shift in the XRD spectra.

#### XPS Spectra of Doped NCs

Figure S11 shows the XPS survey spectra for samples 1-4. The In 3s, 3d, 3p and MNN as well as As 3d, 3p and LMM peaks are clearly seen in all the spectra. In addition, the 1s and 2s peaks of O are observed. These arise from the SiO2 of the Si wafer. The Cu 2p peaks are clearly visible in the spectra of sample 2 and absent from the control sample spectra.

The Ag 3p peaks are present in the spectra of sample 3 and absent from the control spectra.

Similarly the Au 4f peaks are present in the spectra of sample 4 and absent from the control spectra. Figure S12 shows the high resolution XPS measurements of the various samples. The two peaks seen in Figure S12a correspond to the In 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 signals with binding energies of 444.2 and 451.7eV respectively. The peaks from the control, Ag and Au sample are almost identical whereas the peak for the Cu sample is broader. The peak fitting for the Cu doped sample (sample 2) shows contribution also from two additional slightly shifted peaks with binding energies of 444.8 and 452.3eV. These peaks may be related to the presence of a small amount of In2O3. The main peak in Figure S12b corresponds to the As 3d signal at 40.7eV. The control, Ag and Au samples are similar, whereas the Cu sample exhibits another smaller peak at a higher binding energy, 44.2eV. This secondary peak is assigned to As2O3. The presence of In and As oxides is noticeable as all the samples were exposed to air for the same time, less than five minutes, during loading into the vacuum chamber, yet only the Cu sample shows signs of oxidation. Figure S12c, focusing on the Ag peaks, shows for the Ag doped sample 3 the Ag 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 peaks with energies of 368.2 and 374.2eV, respectively. The peak positions match reports for both Ag 0 and Ag 1+ , which are close in energy. In addition, there is a broad background signal at 371eV which is also observed in the control sample (this peak could not be identified and we assign it to a system artefact). The peaks exhibited in Figure S12d for the Cu sample are the Cu 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 with energies of 932.7 and 952.5eV respectively. The values match the reported binding energies for Cu in the 0 or +1 oxidation state, which are close in binding energy. The peaks exhibited in Figure S12e for the Au sample are the Au 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 peaks with energies of 83.9 and 87.5eV, matching reports for Au 0 . Table S1: Diffusion, valence and size parameters for Cu, Ag and Au (5).

The diffusion constants in Table S1 were extrapolated to room-temperature values using equation (1).

The frequency factor, D0, and the activation energy, Ea were taken from literature values (5). R is the gas constant and, T is temperature. The extrapolated frequency factor was subsequently used to determine the root-mean-square distance that a diffusing atom would travel in 24 hours, X24hrs, using equation ( 2).

Where t is time in seconds. As can be seen from Table S1, the X24hrs is much larger than the average size of the NC (2-5nm in diameter). Therefore a diffusing atom can penetrate into a NC in a very short time period. The six coordinate ionic radii are reported from literature values (5) as they are readily available for all the relevant species. For comparison, the value for In 3+ is 0.8 Å.

#### Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Spectroscopy

For the STM measurements, the nanocrystals were deposited on a flat Au(111) film by letting a drop of toluene-nanocrystal solution slowly dry on the substrate. The samples were mounted inside a homemade cryogenic STM that was promptly evacuated and cooled down to 4.2 K for data acquisition, so that samples were exposed to ambient air for less than 15 min. Spatially-resolved tunneling spectra (dI/dV vs. V characteristics, proportional to the local density of states), were measured by first positioning the tip above a single nanocrystal, thus forming a double barrier tunnel junction. Care was taken to retract the STM tip as much as possible from the NC in order to minimize the effect of voltage division between the junctions, which tends to broaden the measured energy-gap and level spacings. However, it is important to note that the main trends reported for the shifts in the center of the gap did not depend on the STM (current and voltage) settings.  In Figure S13 we present the tunneling spectra for undoped and Cu-doped InAs quantumdots, presented in Figure 3 of the paper, but over the full voltage range. The onsets of the conduction and valence bands as well as the tail and localized in-gap states are marked.

Sample Bias (V) The effect appears to be slightly larger in the case of higher doping, but obviously to a marginal extent considering the fluctuations in the measured level structure from one NC to another. This data further demonstrates and establishes the conclusions drawn from figure 3 of the paper, that the bandgap, or conduction and valance band edges, shift to positive energies with Ag doping, to negative energies upon Cu doping, and remain nearly intact (with respect to the undoped InAs NCs) for Au doping. This effect is far larger than the variations observed in the spectra from one NC to another. The effect of the degree of doping, however, could not be clearly discerned due to the broadening of the level structure upon doping, and also the uncertainty in the actual doping level for each one of the single NCs studied, which obviously fluctuates with respect to the averagenominal doping level of the sample.   The Ag causes lattice distortion due to its larger size and introduces two acceptor sites into the lattice due to its lack of valence electrons leading to p-type doping. Note that the bonding in InAs structure has covalent-ionic character and this is not fully described here. The aim of the schemes is to provide a chemically intuitive framework for the doping effects.

We consider, within a simplified Lewis structure framework, the effects of impurity size, location and the number of valence electrons on the interaction between Cu, Ag and Au and the InAs lattice (Figure S17). Cu is small (Table S1) and takes up an interstitial site leading to a small lattice distortion. Such an interstitial Cu will tend to partly donate its valence electrons to the QD leading to n-type doping as depicted in Figure S17b. Indeed Cu is known to be an interstitial donor in InAs (6)(7)(8)(9). Au is known to be a substitutional impurity in Si and III-V semiconductors. It has an isovalent oxidation state with In, Table S1. It therefore acts as an isovalent impurity which does not introduce charge carriers to the lattice. In addition it has a similar size to In (Table S1) and so does not distort the lattice significantly, as shown in Figure S17c. Ag, like Au, is known to be a substitutional impurity in Si and III-V semiconductors. Its tendency for a +1 oxidation state makes it an acceptor leading to p-type doping, and its large size causes significant lattice distortion as shown in Figure S17d.

The size of an impurity can influence its positioning within the lattice. Impurities with small sizes are more likely to take up interstitial sites whereas larger impurities tend to accommodate substitutional sites. The location of the impurity within the lattice affects the type of interaction that occurs. The location of the impurity, in conjunction with its size, affect the extent of the lattice distortion. Calculations on the distortion in bulk silicon caused by a substitutional Cu impurity show that the change in bond length of the first shell of neighboring atoms is around 10% (10). Similar calculations for interstitial first-row transition metals indicate that the change in bond length is 3.6% (11).

This analysis leads to a conclusion that distortions caused by the Ag substitutional impurity are much larger than those caused by the Cu interstitial atom. Although the above mentioned calculations on the distortion of bond lengths for interstitial transition metals in silicon do not treat Cu, it is smaller than the metals considered, and hence it is expected to lead to a smaller change in bond length of less than 3.6%. In addition, InAs has a larger lattice constant than silicon and this should result in a further reduction of the distortion. On the other hand Ag is significantly larger than Cu and therefore it is expected that a substitutional Ag impurity would result in a change in bond length greater than 10%.

#### Theory of Heavily Doped Nanocrystals

. (left) An illustration of the three models investigated. (right) An illustration of how (for example, n-type) doping of a nanocrystal can result in both red and blue shifts in optical spectrum measurements: the intrinsic crystal is shown on the left. To the center, a single donor impurity adds a free level below the intrinsic Fermi energy, causing red shifts in both PL and absorption spectrum measurements. To the right, several impurities packed close together within the crystal may have lower energy levels than the single or isolated impurity, but the electronic ground state may be such that the original Fermi level is occupied as a result of the doping. This leads to a blue shift in the absorption spectrum along with a red shift in the PL.

In this section we provide a detailed discussion of the theories developed to analyze and understand the experimental results. This is done through the consideration of three separate models of nanocrystal doping corresponding to three distinct physical limits, only one of which is directly relevant to the experiments at hand. This complete picture is useful in making a convincing argument that doping is indeed observed. It is worth noting that each of these models correctly scales to the bulk case, where confinement is not an issue and the physics is well known.

In the literature, highly concentrated impurities in bulk have been treated extensively (12), and more recently some properties of hydrogenic dopants within quantum dots of various geometries have also been addressed by both approximate and exact methods (13)(14)(15)(16)(17)(18). However, no theoretical framework to date has allowed for even a conceptual discussion of the energetic and optical properties of excitations in the interesting regime where multiple impurities are confined within a nanocrystal. To remedy this oversight, several simple limits of such a system are considered in the text below. The left panel in Figure S18 presents the models -each of which will be discussed in detail later in the text. The right panel of the same figure provides an explanation of how doping might modify the physical picture.

#### Single Hydrogenic Impurity

The simplest case, and the only one to have been studied extensively, is that of a single impurity somewhere within the crystal. One phrasing of this problem which can be reduced analytically to that of a 1D root search is a hydrogenic impurity at the center of a spherical finite well (18). The hydrogenic approximation is crude at best, as full electrostatic screening does not form on the length scales in question -nevertheless, it is a good starting point. In essence, one must solve the spherically symmetric Schrödinger equation:

Note that the dielectric constant   r ‫ע‬ and effective mass   * m r also vary in space. Specifically, they are different inside and outside the crystal:

Within each region, the solutions are described in spherical coordinates by

. By neglecting the Coulomb interaction one obtains the "bare" problem, where due to the boundary conditions at 0 r  and r the radial dependence of the wavefunction has the form

is the th order spherical Bessel function of the first kind and

is the analogously defined spherical modified Bessel function of the second kind. Similarly, when the impurity is taken into account the radial dependence is  . 22

Due to the spatial dependence of the effective mass, an erroneous non-Hermitian term has actually been introduced into the Hamiltonian: a more rigorous treatment requires the kinetic energy term be replaced by the Hermitian Ben-Daniel-Duke Hamiltonian

, which in this case amounts to taking boundary conditions such that the probability current rather than the derivative of the wavefunction is conserved across the interface 19 . Demanding also that the wavefunction be continuous then allows the boundary conditions to be as:

The roots of this equation determine the bound state energies and allow the explicit construction of the exact wavefunctions. This model is in principle appropriate for describing both electrons in the conduction band and holes in the valence band, as well as both donor and acceptor impurities, as long as the relevant parameters are utilized.

One is often interested in the binding energy, which may be defined as the difference between the energy of a state i in the presence of an impurity and the energy of the corresponding state in the undoped dot, imp dot .

Specifically, the shift  in the absorption spectrum edge is equal to 0 b E . Variational arguments may be used to make it clear that for the ground state, some binding occurs with the addition of any attractive potential (the binding energy is always negative for donors and positive for acceptors). As a result, this model can only account for red shifts in both spectra, when considering both donor and acceptor impurities. It remains useful for determining to first order the effect of parameters such as the crystal size, the barrier energy, the band effective mass and the effective dielectric ratio on the level structure of the crystal.

Note that we have completely neglected the interaction energy between the electron-hole pair and the impurity. To lowest order perturbation treatment in the Coulomb coupling, this interaction is given by

where eh E is the electron-hole interaction (direct and exchange), ih E is the impurity-hole interaction, and ie E is the impurity-electron interaction. c E should be added to imp i E . Similarly, for the exciton energy of the dot, dot i E , one should add the electron-hole interaction, eh E (the only interaction in the undoped QD) and thus, imp dot imp dot

These additional terms are rather small, but there is another factor which when taken into account reduces importance even more greatly: the interaction between the pair electron and the impurity electron is almost exactly cancelled out by the interaction between the pair hole and the impurity electron, i.e.,

ih ie E E  . Nevertheless, it is simple to numerically evaluate the interaction within perturbation theory, and we have found that it makes essentially no difference.

With the exact wave functions known, it is simple enough to calculate the dipole absorption spectrum of the nanocrystal (20). This is done for a certain set of parameters in Figure S19.

The discussion above is suitable not only to the description of a crystal with a single impurity, but also to the case where multiple impurity carriers are entirely independent of each other and of other impurity ions. For N impurities, N perfectly degenerate half-filled impurity ground states occur. This is not a particularly physical situation, especially in a small dot in which the impurity is assumed to be exactly at the center; however, it is illuminating to consider the fact that as the perfect independence is broken, interaction between impurities will begin to remove the degeneracies between levels. If enough of the levels are raised above the intrinsic ground state by this, such that it becomes filled, blue shifts in the absorption spectrum may occur. The next section takes this idea to a more quantitative level. . The relative spectral intensity as a function of the excitation energy of the doped particle (in red) is compared to that of the undoped particle (in black). A red shift of ~80meV is clearly visible, as well as the appearance of further peaks at higher energies.

#### Multiple Strongly Interacting Impurities: The Z-model

The impurity wave functions found in the previous are strongly delocalized within the nanocrystal. If the impurity ions can be assumed to be small and located near the center of the crystal, such that the donor electrons or acceptor holes see their combined and screened charge, it seems reasonable to model the impurities by a 1 z  Coulomb term. Of course, this picture also holds when considering multivalent impurities. One must, as a first approximation, take into account that the single-electron levels are filled in accordance with the Pauli principle, or for greater accuracy consider some form of the full many-body problem. For the purpose of this argument the first approach is taken, and it is later argued that neglecting many-body effects is justified as long as one is satisfied with a qualitative description in the strong confinement regime, where the energetics are dominated by the kinetic term. The parameters are chosen for InAs. Specifically, the effective electron mass within the particle is 0.027 me, the inner dielectric constant ϵ is 12, the outer dielectric constant ϵ' is 2 and, as before, the barrier height is taken to be 3eV. Zero energy corresponds to the bottom of the conduction band. Note that since the shift is defined in relation to the 0 Z  case, in this case the first level's shift is zero by definition.

The first and second energy levels as calculated within the Z-model are shown in Figure S20. Clearly and as expected, these levels are reduced by increasing the ionic valency and therefore the depth of the central Coulomb well. It is also apparent that when confinement is increased, this effect grows appreciably stronger. One can therefore immediately expect larger and more varied shifts when the NCs are decreased in size.

When the level degeneracy is correctly taken into account, one can deduce the shift in the absorption spectrum from the shift in the Fermi level as compared to the dot ground state. The result for InAs is displayed in Figure S21 (left): for 1 Z  this is identical to the singleimpurity case. For 23 Z no shifts occur since the Fermi level is at the dot ground state, as shown in Figure S21 (right). At still higher values, blue shifts of various magnitudes occur. All shifts become substantially smaller in the absence of confinement.

Perhaps the most striking feature of the Z-model is the immediate appearance of a blue shift at very low impurity concentrations, and its decrease in magnitude when more impurities are added. This is a result of the unbroken spherical symmetry of the model, which leads to high level degeneracy. While this limit is certainly of theoretical interest, it clearly does not reflect well the experimental results presented here.

Note that the effect of interactions between electrons has not been taken into account in this context. When one considers a large number of electrons in a high-valence impurity, one cannot, of course, continue to justify this: a quantitative treatment certainly requires a more sophisticated many-body approach. Qualitatively, one can say that an extra positive term 2 ~Z will be added to the impurity. This is expected to significantly modify the system's behaviour at large Z and small R in such a way that the blue shift effect we have discussed will increase at these parameters; the interesting decrease with Z we have predicted may or may not disappear, depending on the detailed magnitude of the effect. From our perturbative estimation of the interaction energy, we expect some of the effect will survive, but further exploration will be needed to provide a definite answer. Z  assuming that the system is described by two s-levels (dotted line impurity lowest, then full line dot) followed by two p-levels (in the same order). The small arrows to the left of the level lines, point to the lowest unoccupied orbital. See the discussion in the text for more details.

#### Multiple Scattered Impurities: the Pseudo-crystal Model

While the previous limits discussed provide interesting insight into the physics of electrons within doped nanocrystals, they both tacitly assume that screening occurs on a scale so small that the impurities may be described as point charges within a dielectric medium. In the more familiar context of impurities within bulk crystals, including the heavily doped regime, this makes sense: even if the impurities are close on the scale of their effective Bohr radii, they remain extremely far away on the atomic scale. However, in semiconductor nanocrystals this is not the case, and the hydrogenic approximation fails (21). While it is safe to assume that the energy of impurity levels remains largely independent on the impurity location (21,22), assuming that the wave function has the form of equation ( 6) rather than some more complicated form dependent on the specific chemistry of the system is most likely wrong. Therefore, either an atomistic treatment or a phenomenological one with this in mind is called for. This section describes a phenomenological model aimed at this problem: we parameterized the properties of randomly distributed impurity levels and combined them into a pseudoband by way of the tight-binding method, with hydrogen-like base states of energy :

The parameter  is the impurity binding energy (which at large particle radii goes to the bulk value). Here, we take  to be constant independent of the position of the impurity within the QD (23). The parameters  and a describe, respectively, the overlap energy at short distances and the typical length scale at which state overlap disappears. In bulk   and 2 *2 a me  ‫ע‬ is determined by the screening and the effective mass ( * m is the effective mass of the carrier and ‫ע‬ is the dielectric constant), but we will allow these parameters to vary more freely. This variation will be considered a heuristic way of incorporating the effects of confinement into the model. By diagonalizing the Hamiltonian above and populating the impurity band and dot levels, we obtain a shifted LUMO level energy. This is exactly the shift  in the absorption spectrum (since the zero of the energy scale corresponds to the dot binding energy).

The above model is, therefore, that of "deep impurities". The impurity electrons (or holes) are bound strongly to the impurity ions, yet are delocalized enough that mixed states can form. This formalism is actually similar to the model used in the heavily doped bulk regime (12), but the justification and parameters are entirely different except in that regime (to which it returns in the appropriate limits). On the other hand, in the infinite dilution limit (a single impurity) and with perfect screening restored, one obviously returns to the case of hydrogenic impurities described in the previous subsections. It is the intermediate regime which is of greatest interest here, as it most closely corresponds to the experiments at hand. While it is perhaps simplest and cleanest to perform the calculation described above for samples which have a well-defined integer number of impurities within them, this is not a realistic assumption in the experimental scenario discussed here, where some distribution of impurity numbers must exist within the measured ensemble. One could assume a Gaussian distribution of the impurity number around the average, for instance -but since the variance is unknown and expected to be large compared to the average, we have preferred to use a Poisson distribution, which has the advantage of requiring no further parameters. The specific choice does not affect the results qualitatively, as long as the distribution is wide enough to smooth over the discontinuous nature of the shift at small impurity concentrations. Poisson distribution is also consistent with a diffusive mechanism of impurities into the nanocrystals. . In the left plot, the short-range mixing energy   as in the bulk limit, while in the right plot 5   .

In practice, the results of the model as plotted in Figure S22 closely resemble those observed when Cu impurities are introduced if one takes 0 E  ‰ and aR ˆ. While fits may be made, the quality of the data is such that they would be of little physical significance. It can, however, be stated with some confidence that if the model is taken to be correct and is used to reproduce the experiments, impurity electrons are highly localized (the impurities are indeed "deep") and mix strongly when impurities are close to each other.

#### Band Tailing in Nanocrystals

A concern one might raise when optical measurements are made to detect doping is that any modification in the spectral properties of the nanoparticles is due to distortion of the symmetric crystal structure by the dopants, rather than by the donation or acceptance of electrons and holes. In the bulk, this is termed as "band tailing" and is known to account for red shifts in the spectrum since it leads to broadening and shifting of the density of states into the gap region. However, the implication of disorder for nanocrystals is still an open question.

In Figure S23 we show the calculated density of states (DOS) for a series of InAs nanocrystals at different levels of disorder. The electronic structure of the nanocrystal was described within the real-space pseudopotential method (24,25). The local screened pseudopotentials used in the results shown here were fitted to reproduce the experimental bulk band-gap and effective masses for InAs (26) neglecting spin orbit coupling (27). Ligand potentials were used to represent the passivation layer (24). We employed a Monte Carlo method (28) which computes directly the DOS as ( ) for In19As16, In44As43, In140As141, In264As249, and In652As627, respectively. To reduce the computational time, Monte Carlo averaging over different realizations of disorder were carried parallel to the aforementioned Monte Carlo trace.

To describe the effect of band tailing induced by doping we randomly chose an In/As atom (or both) and displaced it in a random direction. A normal distribution was used for the magnitude of displacements with a width taken as a parameter. We repeated this procedure for a number of In/As atoms (or both) in the nanocrystal. The level of disorder was then determined by the number of displaced atoms relative to the total number of atoms in the nanocrystal (not including the passivation layer). For the results shown in Figure S23 we used a width of 10% the In-As bond length in the bulk. Similar results with smaller shifts in the DOS were obtained for smaller widths. A collapse of the band-structure was obtained for width of ~20% the In-As bond length.

From the DOS we can calculate the average shifts. Since the conduction band shows very small shifts as a result of the light effective mass of the electron, we focus on the shifts observed for the hole near the top of the valance band. The average shifts shown in Figure S24 were calculated by averaging the local shift between the DOS of the ordered nanocrystal and the DOS of the disordered one and averaging the local shift over the range of energies starting at the isosbestic point to energies slightly below the Fermi level, where the DOS of the ordered nanocrystals has practically decayed to 0. The shifts calculated this way for the displacement of the In atoms (upper panel of Figure S24) are slightly smaller than the shifts calculated for the displacement of As atoms (lower panel of Figure S24). More importantly, the shifts increase with decreasing nanocrystal size (in agreement with the experimental observation) and saturate at lower disorder levels for larger nanocrystals (also consistent with experimental observations).

Figure S23. The effect of disorder on the DOS. The density of states (DOS) for different nanocrystals as a function of energy for different levels of disorder. Solid black, red, green, blue, cyan, and magenta are for disorder levels of 2.8%, 5.7%, 8.6%, 11.4%, 14.3% and 17.1%, respectively. Dashed black curve is the density of states with no disorder. The energy is scaled with respect to the band gap of the ordered nanocrystal for each size respectively. The Fermi energy, f E , is taken mid way between the HOMO and LUMO and g E the undoped quasi-particle gap. This sets the top of the valance band to be at -½ and the bottom the conduction band at +½. 

### Acknowledgment

The authors acknowledge the help of the staff of the Unit for Nanocharacterization of the Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology in the Hebrew University, Jerusalem, headed by Dr. I. Popov, and Dr. Vitaly Gutkin for help in the XPS studies. This research was supported by a grant from the ERC project DCENSY (UB) and by the Israel Science Foundation (O.M.). O.M. acknowledges support from the Harry de Jur Chair in Applied Science. U.B. thanks the Alfred and Erica Larisch Memorial Chair. G.C. is grateful to the Azrieli foundation for the award of an Azrieli fellowship. D.M. acknowledges support from the .Centre for Scientific Absorption, the Ministry of Absorption, the state of Israel

# Heavily Doped Semiconductor Nanocrystal Quantum Dots

David Mocatta 1,3 , Guy Cohen 4 , Jonathan Schattner 2,3 , Oded Millo 2,3 † , Eran Rabani 

