# Introduction

Pig embryo production from in-vitro matured oocytes is becoming increasingly important for both biomedical and agricultural applications [1][2][3]. With the increasing use of CRISPR/Cas9 technology to produce pig models for human disease and agricultural use, it is becoming imperative to increase the efficiency and competency of oocytes produced in vitro. In-vitro maturation (IVM) also plays a crucial role in human in vitro fertilization as an alternative to exposing women to high levels of superovulating hormones, a protocol that runs the risk of causing ovarian hyper stimulation syndrome [4][5][6]. However, attaining developmental competence in oocytes from unstimulated ovaries remains a challenge [7]. The oocyte ability to resume meiosis, complete maturation, and undergo successful fertilization with subsequent normal embryo development to blastocyst and then to term is a feature that is only acquired gradually as the oocyte grows to the antral follicle stage in vivo [8][9][10]. The exact molecular and cellular mechanisms by which oocytes reach nuclear and cytoplasmic maturation remain incompletely understood but are believed to be linked in some manner to the intimate relationship with their neighboring somatic cells and surrounding fluid environment within the follicle.

Possibly due to our inability to simulate an authentic follicular environment, immature cumulus-oocyte complexes (COC) do not respond as well to GN during IVM as they do in vivo. Mural granulosa cells in preovulatory follicles express luteinizing hormone (LH) receptors but often expression is low or undetectable in CC [11] thus explaining the poor response to LH in IVM [12]. Moreover, oocyte competence is invariably compromised. Our previous work demonstrated the combination of Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) (termed "FLI") together during IVM of oocytes derived from immature pig ovaries provided a twofold increase in the efficiency of blastocyst production after fertilization [13]. The COC matured with FLI had a more rapid expansion of CC than oocytes without FLI. Overall CC expansion was five times greater at the end of IVM at 42 h than at the start of maturation, while these values were considerably more modest in COC matured without FLI. Cumulus cell expansion and volume have been generally considered an essential feature of oocyte maturation and used as an indicator of the oocyte developmental capacity [14,15].

It is thought that CC and oocytes require bidirectional communication for development of an oocyte that is competent to undergo fertilization and embryogenesis [16]. Oocytes secrete growth factors, commonly referred to as oocyte-secreted factors (OSFs), regulate granulosa cell differentiation and CC proliferation [17], control the rate of follicle development in vivo [18], promote glycolysis needed for oocyte metabolism [19], and more [20]. The CC support oocyte cytoplasmic maturation and employ an extensive network of gap junctions that penetrate the zona pellucida to relay endocrine and other environmental signals [21]. Nearly all glucose consumed by the COC is metabolized in the CC and almost none by the oocyte [19]. In CC, glucose is metabolized by glycolysis and the resulting pyruvate is transported to the oocyte for ATP production through the TCA cycle or through the pentose phosphate pathway for NADPH and ribose-5-phosphate production [22]. Gonadotropins, follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), and LH, bind to their respective receptors on membranes of CC and activate adenylate cyclase, which leads to the production of cyclic adenosine 3 -5 monophosphate (cAMP) in COC from early antral follicles [23]. Follicle stimulating hormone and LH exposure is considered to enhance in-vitro fertilization and subsequent embryonic development of in-vitro matured porcine oocytes [24], although there are a few reports that they can undergo meiosis without the addition of FSH and LH to the medium [15,[25][26][27] and produce live piglets provided they are supplemented with dibutyryl cyclic AMP and epidermal growth factor (EGF)family peptides [28].

As our knowledge of the factors that play a role in maturation increases, understanding the relationship between growth factors, CC, and the oocyte becomes seemingly more complex. Historically CC expansion has been considered to be required for successful maturation in vitro, with the phenomenon long used as a visual indicator of good quality oocytes. Cumulus cells are certainly required for maturation of the oocyte, since their removal at the beginning of maturation and even as late as 24 h after initiating maturation decreases oocyte competence [29,30]. Here, we have revisited the issue of whether the presence of GN is required for efficient in vitro oocyte maturation and CC expansion and if these phenomena are correlates of oocyte competence.

# Materials and methods

## Ethics

All experimental use of animals was approved by University of Missouri Animal Care and Use Committee.

## Chemical components

Unless otherwise specified, all chemical components were purchased from Sigma Chemical Company (St. Louis, MO).

## Oocyte IVM, fertilization and culture

Ovaries from prepubertal gilts were collected from an abattoir (Smithfield-Farmland, Milan, MO) and transported to the University of Missouri. The COC were aspirated from medium-sized follicles (3-6 mm diameter) by using an 18-gauge needle attached to a 10 mL syringe. Oocytes containing at least two layers of CC and possessing a homogenous cytoplasm were selected for maturation. About 50 COC were placed in one well of a 4-well dish with 0.5 mL of chemically defined maturation medium, TCM 199 (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) containing 3.05-mM glucose, 0.91-mM sodium pyruvate, 0.57-mM cysteine, 10-ng/mL EGF, 10-μg/mL gentamicin (APP Pharm, Schaumburg, IL), 0.1% polyvinyl alcohol with or without 0.5-μg/mL LH and 0.5-μg/mL FSH, and with or without FLI (40-ng/mL FGF2 [13], 20-ng/mL LIF [Millipore, Cat # 1050], 20-ng/mL IGF1 [Prospec, Cat #CYT022]) for 42-44 h at 38.5 • C, 5% CO 2 in humidified air [13]. At the end of the maturation period, CC were removed by vortexing for 3 min in the presence of 0.1% (wt/vol) hyaluronidase. Mature oocytes were selected by the presence of a polar body, and then groups of ∼30 oocytes were placed into 50-μL drops of modified Tris Buffered Medium (mTBM; 113.1-mM NaCl, 3-mM KCl, 7.5-mM CaCl 2 , 11-mM glucose, 20-mM Tris, 2-mM caffeine, 5-mM sodium pyruvate, and 2-mg/mL bovine serum albumin). A frozen semen pellet was thawed in 3 mL of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) supplemented with 0.1% BSA and 10-μg /mL gentamicin. The thawed sperm pellet was washed in a 45% Percoll solution for 30 min at 550 × g and then in mTBM for 10 min by centrifugation. The sperm pellet was suspended in mTBM to 0.5× 10 6 cells/mL. Fifty microliters of the sperm suspension were then added to the microdrops containing oocytes and co-incubated for 4 h at 38.5 • C in an atmosphere of 5% CO 2 in air. After coincubation with sperm, the embryos were washed and incubated in MU2 medium [31][32][33] at 38.5 • C in an atmosphere of 5% CO 2 in air. The next morning, embryos were moved to a low oxygen atmosphere (5% O 2 , 5% CO 2 , and 90% N 2 ) until day 6. On day 6, blastocysts were collected and stained with Hoechst 33342 (0.01 mg/mL) to determine nuclear number.

## Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR)

To minimize their damage, CC were removed from 100 COC 16-h post maturation by gently pipetting up and down 100 times with a 200-μL pipette in a 0.1% (wt/vol) hyaluronidase solution. The oocytes were removed from the solution and CC were centrifuged at 300× g for 5 min. The supernatant was removed, and CC were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for RNA isolation. RNA was extracted from the CC by using the RNeasy micro kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD). Total RNA was suspended in 20-μL nuclease free H 2 O and converted to cDNA by using the SuperScript VILO kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). Real-time PCR was then conducted for each of 12 candidate genes by using iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Primers were designed and primer efficiencies were calculated as previously described ([13]; Table 1). Real-time PCR was completed in triplicate for each biological replicate on the CFX Connect real-time PCR detection system (Bio-Rad Laboratories). The housekeeping gene, Calreticulin (CALR), was selected as a stable reference gene for this experiment [13].

## Cumulus oocyte complex expansion assessment

Cumulus cell expansion was imaged by using the CytoSMART live imaging system (Lonza, Walkersville, MD) as described in Yuan et al. [13]. About 50 COC were placed in 500 μL of maturation medium with or without 0.5-μg/mL LH and 0.5-μg/mL FSH, and with or without FLI (40-ng/mL FGF2, 20-ng/mL LIF, and 20-ng/mL IGF1) for 42 h at 38.5 • C, in 5% CO 2 in humidified air. Images were taken every 7.5 min during the 42-h IVM. This imaging system allowed the number of COC and the overall area they occupied within a fixed field of view to be measured. The average size of the COC at specific time points was estimated by dividing the overall coverage by the number of COC in the field of view. A CC expansion index, representing the relative size of COC at any time point relative to the size of COC at 0 h, was used to assess the degree of CC expansion.

## Glucose assay

After 42-h IVM, 50 COC were removed from 500-μL wells, and spent IVM medium was collected and analyzed for the concentration of the remaining glucose. Unspent medium was also collected from 500-μL wells that did not contain any COC. Glucose concentration was analyzed by using a glucose fluorometric assay kit (BioVision, CA, USA).

## Measurement of MAPK1/3 in CC by western blot

Cumulus cells were removed from oocytes as described above. Cell suspensions containing only CC were centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 min. Cell pellets were snap frozen and stored at -80 • C before western blotting [13]. The same concentration of protein for each sample was loaded and analyzed by separation on a 10% SDS/PAGE gel (BioRad), transferred to a PVDF membrane (BioRad) and incubated in phosphop-p44/22 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) primary antibody (Cell Signaling, Catalog no. 4370, 1:2000) overnight. Anti-rabbit HRP-coupled secondary antibody was used to visualize bands by using Pierce ECL 2 Blotting Substrate (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Images were acquired with a FOTODYNE FOTO/-Analyst FX. The blot was stripped with a stripping buffer (for 1 L: 15-g glycine, 1-g SDS, 10-mL Tween 20 pH 2.2 and bring to 1 L with ultrapure water). The blot was then incubated with MAPK antibody (Cell Signaling, Catalog no. 4695, 1:1000) to detect the amount of total MAPK. The same blot was stripped again and re-probed 

## Statistical analyses

To determine the effect of FLI on maturation and development, the percentage of oocytes that developed to the MII and blastocyst stage in each treatment group was analyzed by using a general linear model in SAS (V9.4, SAS Institute, Cary, NC). For quantitative PCR data, transcript abundance was determined by using the comparative threshold cycle (C T ) method for each gene. The 2 -CT values were analyzed for normality. If the values were not normally distributed, they were log-transformed. The resulting values were analyzed by using the general linear model (PROC GLM) in SAS. Differences were found by using the least squares means generated by PROC GLM. Glucose consumption was analyzed by using a one-way analysis of variance with a Tukey-Kramer multiple post-test comparison. Statistical analysis of cumulus expansion was completed by using a mixed model in SAS and a Tukey-Kramer post-test comparison. The ratio of pMAPK/MAPK in CC was analyzed by using a generalized linear model. Cumulus expansion was analyzed by using repeated measures function of Proc Mixed Data, followed by a Tukey-Kramer post-test comparison in SAS.

## Embryo transfer

To demonstrate the developmental competence of COC matured without GN, COC were matured in IVM without LH and FSH but with the addition FLI for 42 h -GN + FLI) at 38.5 • C, 5% CO 2 in humidified air. At the end of IVM, oocytes that extruded a polar body were selected and co-incubated with sperm for 4 h in mTBM at 38.5 • C in an atmosphere of 5% CO 2 in air. After coincubation, embryos were washed and cultured in MU2 at 38.5 • C in an atmosphere of 5% CO 2 in air. The next morning, embryos were moved to a low oxygen atmosphere (5% O 2 , 5% CO 2 , and 90% N 2 ) until day 6. On day 6, 40 blastocysts were selected and placed in 3 mL of manipulation medium (9.50-g TCM-199, 0.05-g NaHCO 3 , 0.75-g Hepes, 1.76-g NaCl, 0.30-g BSA, 1-mL gentamicin, and 1000-mL Milli Q H 2 O) in polystyrene tubes (BD Falcon, San Jose, CA). Embryos were then transported at 37 • C to the University of Missouri Swine Research Complex where they were loaded into a tomcat catheter and surgically transferred to the ampullary-isthmic junction of cycling gilt on day 5 of her estrous cycle [35,36]. Pregnancy was determined by heat checking and monitored by ultrasound after day 25. The gilt was checked weekly until farrowing.

# Results

## Effects of GN and FLI on nuclear maturation of oocytes and embryo development to blastocyst stage

When FLI was absent from the chemically defined maturation medium, oocytes matured in the presence of GN demonstrated improved nuclear maturation and blastocyst formation relative to oocytes matured without GN. However, when FLI was present in the medium, the extent of oocyte maturation and blastocyst formation was unaffected by the addition of GN (Figure 1).

## Effects of GN and FLI on CC expansion

The effects of GN were then tested on CC expansion when COC were matured with or without FLI. In the absence of GN but in presence of FLI, CC barely expanded (compare Figure 2D with 2C; Figure 3A). As anticipated, GN alone promoted modest CC expansion (Figures 2A and3A) but less dramatically as observed with the combination treatment (Figures 2B and3A). It would appear that the effects of +GN + FLI are approximately additive. When neither supplement was present, there was no measurable COC expansion (Figures 2C and3). However, GN and not FLI appeared to be responsible for the early minor expansion followed by shrinkage of CC size in the initial 8 h of maturation Figure 3B, which we had initially observed in our earlier paper [13]. An additional observation whose implications are unclear is that in the presence of FLI, i.e., +GN + FLI and -GN + FLI, the CC loosen and fall away from the oocyte before the end of the 42-h maturation period (Supplemental Videos S1-S4).

To determine if FLI activates MAPK3/1 in the absence of GN we measured the ratio of pMAPK to MAPK by western blot in CC from the control and FLI medium with and without GN at 22 and 42 h. In the absence of GN, pMAPK does not accumulate, even when FLI is present (Figure 4). While, as expected, the ratio increases in response to +GN + FLI.

Glucose consumption was measured in the medium at the end of each treatment compared with unspent medium controls.  The unspent medium was set at 100% and the data from each group were presented as the relative level of glucose compared to the unspent medium. The only treatment that led to a measurable consumption of glucose was +GN + FLI (Figure 5).

Genes whose expression has been linked to the formation of hyaluronan matrix, such as TNFAIP6 (TNF alpha-induced protein 6), which encodes a hyaluronan-binding protein, PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2), which plays a role in signaling and promoting CC expansion [37], and HAS2 (hyaluronan synthase 2) were analyzed by quantitative PCR at 16 h into maturation (Figure 6). The abundance of transcripts from these genes was highest in presence of GN, whether or not FLI was also present. In the absence of GN and FLI (-GN -FLI), where CC expansion was negligible, PTGS2 and HA2 transcripts were barely detectable, while there was still a significant increase in abundance of TNFAIP6. Unexpectedly the effects of GN and FLI on HAS2 transcript abundance appeared to be additive (as they were on COC expansion), with FLI alone able to increase HAS2 about as effectively as GN alone.

Abundance of FSHR mRNA was highest in CC cultured without either GN or FLI (-GN -FLI). LHR transcripts increased about the same under all conditions, i.e., with no stimulatory effect of either GN or FLI.

Production of EGF-like factors, particularly amphiregulin (AREG) and epiregulin (EREG) is regulated by FSH in porcine CC, and these factors have been reported to improve developmental competence of porcine oocytes [38]. Transcripts from their genes exhibited a fairly similar pattern of up-regulation during maturation, with both appearing to be responsive to GN rather Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/biolreprod/article/105/2/533/6271426 by guest on 07 May 2024 than FLI. Transcripts for the gene encoding betacellulin (BTC), a third EGF family member, was less abundant rather than more abundant after the first 16 h of maturation, consistent with others [39].

Apoptosis-associated gene, TP53, transcript abundance was highest in absence of GN regardless of whether FLI was present. A second pro-apoptotic gene BAD showed increased transcript abundance under all conditions, with effects of GN and FLI difficult to discern. GAPDH abundance differences, if they exist, were also largely blurred because of the extent of variance across the data. Lastly, the transcript for cytochrome P450 member whose protein product is responsible for cholesterol side chain cleavage, CYP11A1, was, as expected, responsive to GN but not to FLI (Figure 6).

Oocytes derived from maturation in a medium lacking GN but containing FLI were fertilized and allowed to develop in vitro (Supplemental Figure S1). Ten healthy piglets were born after the transfer of 40 day 6 blastocysts to a recipient gilt. The litter comprised six females and four males that had birthweights that ranged from 0.9 to 1.6 Kg.

# Discussion

Cumulus cell expansion occurs in response to GN, growth factors, steroids, oocyte secreted factors, and other unknowns [40,41]. It has been previously proposed that such expansion of CC is necessary for meiotic maturation and also for acquisition of developmental competence. However, as discussed below, our in-vitro experiments show that this hypothesis is incorrect, at least in swine.

Previously, we demonstrated that immature pig oocyte maturation and CC expansion were greatly improved when the COC were cultured in the presence of GN and a cocktail of three key growth factors (FGF2, LIF, and IGF1)-so-called FLI medium. After fertilization, these FLI-matured oocytes provided a two-fold increase in the efficiency of blastocyst production and a fourfold increase in the number of piglets born per oocyte collected [13]. Our conclusion was that FLI merely enhanced the effects of GN. Here, we have shown that when GN are excluded from the maturation medium, equivalent oocyte maturation and competence can still be achieved with only negligible CC expansion, provided that FLI supplement is present (Figures 123). The paradox, however, is that when GN and FLI are present together, there is greatly enhanced CC expansion, with the two supplements appearing to act synergistically. In other words, FLI probably has a dual role. It directly improves oocyte competence, a process where GN are not required, and, when GN are present, FLI has a downstream role in enhancing CC expansion, although it is incapable of driving this process on its own.

A preliminary experiment was completed to determine if CC were required to see the effect of FLI on maturation. The CC were removed at different time points during maturation and cultured with or without FLI. When CC were removed before 24 h, there was a decrease in maturation and blastocyst development which has been seen previously [29], and a decrease was also seen even in the presence of FLI (unpublished). Removing CC at 24 h had little effect on maturation. Thus, we concluded that CC are needed for FLI to have an effect on the oocyte early on in maturation.

The present study also shows that elevated levels of phosphorylated MAPK may not be a necessary correlate of oocyte maturation (Figure 4), although a detailed time course with and without GN and MAPK inhibitors would be necessary to prove this hypothesis. Nonetheless, it would appear that MAPK signaling has more to do with CC expansion than with oocyte maturation. Similarly, the greater utilization of glucose by COC when both GN and FLI were supplied together is probably a reflection of the biosynthetic needs of the CC to produce large amounts of hyaluronan and expand under those conditions [42] rather than to attain developmental competence. One mystery, however, was that, despite not driving CC expansion, FLI alone was able to upregulate three genes implicated in the elaboration of extracellular matrix, namely TNFAIP6, HAS2, and PTGS2, although effects on the first two were quite modest (Figure 6). The lack of FLI regulation of AREG, EREG, and BTC, whose translational products have been implicated in controlling the expression of the aforementioned TNFAIP6, HAS2, and PTGS2 genes [43,44], suggests that FLI might by-pass any requirement of the oocyte for EGF-like growth factors during its maturation. Analyses of several other genes, including ones encoding the GN receptors, were also not informative with regard to providing a mechanism to explain whereby FLI medium enhances oocyte competence without promoting CC expansion.

What role then, if any, is played by CC expansion? It is well established that when CC are removed from oocytes, there is a dramatic decrease in the oocyte ability to attain nuclear and cytoplasmic competence in vitro [29]. Cumulus cells have a substantial influence on oocyte biology and are essential for production of competent oocytes in vivo [18] by supplying the oocyte with small molecular weight molecules required for meiotic regulation and metabolism. In mice, when CC are removed at the start of maturation and supplemented with FGF2, there was no effect on maturation rate [45]. This result indicates that the effect FGF2 has on oocyte meiosis is likely mediated by CC. We must assume, therefore, that this critical role as nurse cells remains in-play even in absence of a massive synthesis of hyaluronan and accompanying expansion of the CC layer. Cumulus cell expansion in vivo may have a more important role than in vitro, for example by protecting the oocyte from compression or biochemical damage during events leading up to ovulation, dangers not experienced during IVM.

In summary, the results presented here illustrate that exposure to GN and the accompanying CC expansion are not essential features of oocyte maturation as was once thought [46][47][48] and that these two processes are likely controlled by distinct signaling pathways. Further studies are still needed to fully elucidate the detailed mechanisms by which FLI can promote oocyte competence without initiating CC expansion.

# Acknowledgments

The authors would like to acknowledge our veterinarian, Dr. Clifton Murphy, who completed this embryo transfer at the age of 91. This was the one of the last sets of embryo transfers Dr. Murphy completed before passing away in 2020 (9 July 1926-3 January 2020). He had a profound impact on the embryo transfer community and a lasting impression on everyone he met. His impact on the other authors of this manuscript both personally and professionally was profound. He is greatly missed. We would also like to acknowledge Jason Dowell for the reproductive management of the pigs used in this project.

# Data availability

The data underlying this article are presented in the article and its online supplementary material.

# Supplementary material

Supplementary material is available at BIOLRE online.  

