# Introduction

The intradermal delivery of therapeutic cells has great potential for treating both local and systematic diseases (e.g., mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) for wound healing, melanocytes for vitiligo treatment, dendritic cells (DCs) and chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells for immunotherapy). The key to a successful treatment is the precise delivery of cells at the desired location and depth for the optimal response and outcome. Microneedles (MNs) are the minimized hypodermic needle array and recently suggested as a powerful platform for the transdermal delivery of therapeutic cells. For example, Lee et. al. developed a hydrogel MN with an outer poly(lactic-co-glycolic) protective shell to deliver MSCs for wound regeneration. [1] Chen et. al. seeded human keratinocytes and human follicle dermal papilla cells on the surface of solid poly-methyl methacrylate or metal MN patches. [2] Subsequently, the coated cells could be transplanted into the hydrogel or the targeted tissues within 3 days. Li et. al. seeded CAR T cells on the surface of porous MNs and implanted them for direct intratumoral injection. [3] However, all these cellloaded MN platforms require fresh preparation and immediate application of the cell products to preserve cell viability and functionality.

Cryomicroneedle (cryoMN) technology allows the package of cells into MNs in advance and direct usage in clinics, which overcomes the above challenge. [4,5] The cryoMNs are manufactured by shaping and freezing the cell-containing cryogenic media in the MN template. The prepared devices can be stored for months in a freezer and are easily transported and deployed. It circumvents complex and redundant procedures during each cell administration. Experiments showed that DC vaccination through cryoMNs elicited robust antigen-speci c immune responses and provided strong protection against tumors in mice. However, cryoMNs are pre-fabricated through the stepwise cryogenic molding of the cell suspension before they are demolded and stored in the liquid nitrogen/-80 o C freezer. This reinforces the use of ultralow temperature freezer for transportation and storage of cryoMNs. And it also doesn't allow the loading of the autologous cells by the user in situ.

This article develops an in situ forming cryoMNs or the second generation of cryoMNs (S-cryoMNs) that addresses these limitations (Figure 1). Speci cally, we propose a porous sponge-like MN that allows the loading of cells by the one-step dipping. These MN scaffolds are made through lyophilization of crosslinked hydrogels. They can be packed, transported, and stored at room temperature. Cells suspended in the optimized cryopreservation formula are then loaded into the porous MNs by the users through the dipping process, driven by the capillary force. [6] The loaded MNs can be directly used in situ after freezing or be stored in liquid nitrogen/-80 o C freezer in the end-use clinical facilities for later usage. S-cryoMNs is relatively simple to fabricate and use. It also minimizes the potential contaminations and cell damages that might happen during the storage and distribution of 1 st generation cryoMN products from central manufacturers. As a proof-of-concept, we developed and applied S-cryoMNs for intradermal delivery of both allogeneic and autologous cells, including MSCs for wound healing, melanocytes for vitiligo treatment, and antigen-pulsed DCs for cancer vaccination.

# Fabrication and characterization of porous MN scaffolds

The porous scaffolds for creating S-cryoMNs were made through the lyophilization of hydrogels in the MN template. As a proof-of-concept, we took methacrylated hyaluronic acid (MeHA) to show the principle. Hyaluronic acid (HA) with different molecular weights (Mw = 48 kDa and 300 kDa) was rstly modi ed with methacrylic anhydride to get the photocrosslinkable 48-MeHA and 300-MeHA. The degrees of substitution, evaluated by 1 H NMR, were 93.6% and 70.3% for 48-MeHA and 300-MeHA respectively (Figure S1). Later MeHA aqueous solution lled the negative polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) MN mold and was photo-crosslinked before freeze-drying (Fig. 2A). The ice was the porogen here that introduced the micropores in the MN structure. [7][8][9] The derived MN scaffold showed the similar morphology as the original MN master template. While the stainless-steel master MN template had a height of 1,200 µm and a base width of 300 µm (Figure S2),the height and base were 700 µm and 270 µm for porous MNs made of 48-MeHA, 620 µm and 320 µm for MNs made of 300-MeHA. The changes of the MN scaffold dimension have been observed in many previous studies, which is due to the shrinkage of PDMS and polymeric matrix. [10][11][12] The porous structure of MNs was tunable through adjusting the MeHA concentration and photocrosslinking time. We examined the morphology change of the MN scaffolds made with different MeHA concentrations (2,4,5,6 wt.% for 300-MeHA; 2, 4, 6, 8 wt.% for 48-MeHA) under the same crosslinking time (5 min). As shown in Fig. 2B&C, 300-MeHA MNs provided the porous structure when the concentration of polymer was 4%. 48-MeHA MNs had the similar results at 4% and 6% wt.%. A lower concentration won't provide a stable MN structure while the higher concentrations signi cantly decreased the porosity.[6, 13] The crosslinking time is another important parameter. With the optimized MeHA concentrations (i.e., 4% for 300-MeHA, 6% for 48-MeHA), we changed the UV crosslinking from 3 min (CL3), 5 min (CL5), 10 min (CL10), to 20 min (CL20) (Fig. 2D&E). In general, the longer UV exposure time, the lower porosity was. [14] Speci cally, when the crosslinking was 10 min or longer, we got a shell structure instead of the porous structure. This shell structure is not preferred for loading cells.

Therefore, CL3 and CL5 of 48-MeHA (i.e., CL3-48-MeHA and CL5-48-MeHA) and CL3 of 300-MeHA (i.e., CL3-300-MeHA) were identi ed as the optimal formulations due to their intact MN structure and observable porosity. We further analyzed their porosity and dimension through SEM images using ImageJ. CL3-48-MeHA and CL5-48-MeHA MNs had an average MN height of 697.1 ± 21.0 µm and 682.9 ± 10.7 µm, respectively. CL3-300-MeHA MN was slightly shorter at 616.4 ± 32.8 µm. The average pore sizes for CL3-48-MeHA, CL5-48-MeHA, and CL3-300-MeHA were 81.0 ± 36.8 µm, 56.6 ± 22.8 µm, and 54.2 ± 23.9 µm, respectively. The pore size matches well with the mammalian cells that are usually 10-30 µm in suspension. Out of these three hits, we took CL3-300-MeHA as a representative for the following studies.

While the rest of the work was done with MeHA porous MN scaffold, it deserves to note that other hydrogel-derived scaffolds can also be used. As shown by Figure S3, porous MN scaffolds may be prepared from other hydrogel formulations including but not limited to cryogelation of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), cryogelation of gelatin (Gelatin), EDC/NHS (1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide/Nhydroxysuccinimide)-crosslinked gelatin (EDC/NHS-Gel), 1,4-Butanediol diglycidyl ether crosslinked hyaluronic acid (BDDE-HA), photocrosslinked gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA), and photocrosslinked polyethylene glycol diacrylate (PEGDA).

Cell loading and release from S-cryoMNs S-cryoMNs are made by dipping the porous MN scaffold in the cell suspension and freezing. Like the rst generation of cryoMNs, the cryogenic medium is the key parameter for maintaining cell viability and functions in the device. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) is clearly the most popular cryoprotective agent by binding with water molecules to prevent the ice crystallization and cell damage. [15,16] However, the standard concentration of cryoprotectant (i.e., 10%, v/v) could be toxic to the cells to induce cell membrane damage and gene expression alteration [17]. During the intradermal delivery of the therapeutic cells, the high dosage of DMSO in the cryoprotective solution might bring unwanted side effects to therapeutic cells and surrounding skin cells.

Macromolecular cryoprotectants have been reported to partially substitute DMSO to reduce its toxicity, in which hydrophilic macromolecules bind with water and increase solution viscosity to inhibit extracellular ice growth.[18] Hydrogel-forming polymers are macromolecules featured with good biocompatibility and good a nity with water molecules. Some of them such as polyethylene glycol (PEG), and hydroxyethyl starch (HES) have been applied in the cryopreservation for red blood cells [19,20], stem cells [21][22][23], and other mammalian cells [24][25][26]. Therefore, hydrogel polymers are considered potential candidates to supplement DMSO to develop low toxic cryoprotective medium.

We screened eight hydrogel-forming polymers that have been used to cryopreserve cells, including PEG, HES, methylcellulose (MC), sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), HA, chitosan, gelatin, and alginate. These polymers were mixed with a low dosage of DMSO (i.e., 1% and 2%) as the cryogenic media for cryopreservation of human dermal broblasts. Out of eight candidates, the cryogenic media containing PEG, HES, MC, and CMC ensured cell survival (Figure S4). Later, the concentrations of PEG, HES, MC and CMC were further screened, tuning from 0, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0 to 2.5 wt.% (Figure S5). When the concentration of DMSO is lower than 1%, the cryogenic solution didn't show su cient protection of cells in cryopreservation. With 2% DMSO, all cryogenic solutions of four polymers provided similar or even higher cell viability than 10% DMSO. We further con rmed the preservation capability of these four best formulations (i.e., 2.5 wt.% PEG, 2.5 wt.% MC, 2.5 wt.% CMC, 0.25 wt.% of HES, with 2.0% DMSO) on other three types of cells including human keratinocytes (HaCaT), human malignant melanoma cell line (A375), and human bone marrow-derived MSCs. As shown in Fig. 3A, broblasts, A375, and HaCaT maintained comparable if not higher viabilities in these cryogenic formulations to those in the classic cryogenic medium with 10% DMSO (except 2% DMSO + 0.25% HES for HaCaT). However, no advantage in modi ed cryopreservation solution was observed in hMSCs except for 2% DMSO + 2.5% CMC. More importantly, the cryogenic solution featured with PEG, HES, MC, and CMC did not induce any signi cant toxicity compared with medium with 10% DMSO (Figure S6). Formulation containing 2.5% of CMC and 2% DMSO was nally selected as the representative cryogenic solution for the subsequent cell loading.

The representative porous MN scaffold (CL3-300-MeHA) was immersed in the cryogenic medium containing cells (A375 cells as an example here) for 1 min. The loading of cells into the porous MN scaffold was driven by capillary force during the wetting. If the scaffold was pre-wetted, cells could not get into the matrix (Figure S7A). The polymeric component (e.g., CMC) increased the viscosity of cryogenic solution and thus reduced the climbing viscosity of the solution inside the scaffold [27], which was bene cial to uniformly distribute cells in the porous scaffold (Figure S7B).

Later, the cell-loaded S-cryoMNs patch was frozen using the cryopreservation box. After overnight freezing, the patch was stored at -80 ºC for the short-term or in liquid nitrogen for longer storage (> 7 days). When the frozen S-cryoMNs were exposed to room temperature (24°C), they melted and were totally thawed within 2 min (Fig. 3B andS8). The encapsulated A375 cells had an average viability of 76.3 ± 7.7% (Fig. 3C). The green dye-labeled cells was seen to reside inside the tips of S-cryoMNs (Fig. 3D) and the number of loaded cells inside S-cryoMNs can be tuned with the initial cell density in the cell suspension solution. The release of cells from S-cryoMNs was tested on the agarose skin phantom.

When the cell concentration was raised from 2.5×10 6 to 5.0×10 6 , 7.5×10 6 , and 1.0×10 7 cells/mL in the cryogenic medium, the numbers of released cells of each needle increased accordingly from about 10 cells/ needle up to 240 cells/ needle (Fig. 3E&F). The loaded cells were released from S-cryoMNs along the melting and degradation of S-cryoMNs (Figure S9A). The degradation behavior of porous MN scaffold could be e ciently tuned by adjusting second crosslinking to achieve a desirable release pro le (Figure S9A&B). In the following studies, the second crosslinking of 8 min was adopted to achieve relatively fast release within 8 hr.

As shown in Fig. 3G&H, the S-cryoMNs easily penetrated the agarose gel and delivered the stained A375 cells inside the agarose gel with a depth of around 200 µm. The mechanical strength of S-cryoMNs was also validated on ex vivo porcine skin, where the S-cryoMNs could be easily inserted into the skin and proved the approximate penetration depth of 450 µm from the histological images (Figure S10). Note: the agarose gel is much more elastic than the porcine skin so that S-cryoMNs had less penetration into the gel phantom.

# S-cryoMNs for the delivery of allogeneic and autologous cells

In cell therapies, cells to be delivered might originate from the patient (autologous cells) or a donor (allogeneic cells). These therapeutic cells are collected, expanded, and engineered ex vivo before administration to patients. The S-cryoMNs adopt a dip-loading procedure and thus allow the on-site preparation for subsequent cell delivery as well as the long-term storage for later application (Fig. 4A).

Here we used hMSCs and melonocytes as the model cells to demonstrate the potential applications of S-cryoMNs for delivering both allogenic cells and autologous cells.

MSCs are promising therapeutic cells because of their immunosuppressive and tissue repair properties [28]. Autologous MSCs could suffer from insu cient quantities, decreased biological activity (e.g., elderly donors), or impaired functions (e.g., donors with systemic diseases). Using allogeneic MSCs from young healthy donors is a reasonable approach to resolving this issue. Here we loaded hMSCs into S-cryoMNs and examined their potential application in wound healing through scratch assay and tube formation assay [29]. The scratch assay was to examine the migration capability of dermal broblasts in response to hMSCs delivered using S-cryoMNs. We rst examined the migration and proliferation of broblasts into the wounded area at 24 hr and 48 hr post treatment under four conditions: low serum group (1% FBS instead of 5% FBS in other groups), positive control group (20 ng/mL TGF-β1), blank S-cryoMNs group, and hMSCs-loaded S-cryoMNs. As shown in Fig. 4B and S11, treatment with S-cryoMNs signi cantly promoted the migration of broblasts. The closure was 50.8 ± 6.1% at 24 hr and 86.5 ± 5.0% at 48 hr, while the value was 25.5 ± 11.4% at 24 hr and 59.1 ± 7.6% at 48 hr for the group treated with the blank S-cryoMNs. This result is comparable to that from the positive control. We also carried out the tube formation assay and examined four conditions including the low serum (1.5% FBS instead of 5% FBS in other groups), positive control (40 ng/mL VEGF), blank S-cryoMNs, and hMSCs-loaded S-cryoMNs. 8 hr post the treatment, the tube-like network was clearly seen (Figure S12). For the group treated with hMSCsloaded S-cryoMNs, there was a 2.3-time increase intotal tube length compared to that treated with blank S-cryoMNs (Fig. 4C). The treatment with hMSCs-loaded S-cryoMNs increased the number of tubes and branching nodes by 2.7 times and 2.0 times as well, respectively to those of blank S-cryoMNs treatment.

Vitiligo is a skin depigmentation disorder caused by the autoimmune destruction of melanocytes to lose melanin expression [30,31]. Autologous melanocyte transplantation is a surgical strategy to regenerate melanocytes and repigment vitiliginous areas [32,33]. As melanocytes typically reside in basal epidermis and dermis junctions [34], the recipient sites are commonly exposed to the papillary dermis by invasive abrasion methods (e.g., laser abrasion [35], dermabrasion [36,37], and suction blister method [38]) to ensure the survival of melanocytes after transplantation. Here, we demonstrated to use of B16-loaded and melanocytes (Mela)-loaded S-cryoMNs to restore melanin expression on a mouse model. The B16loaded S-cryoMNs (characterization details shown in Figure S13) were applied on mice back by thumb press to intradermally deliver B16 cells, which was compared with the dermabrasion technique (Fig. 5A).

As shown in Fig. 5B&C, one day after the cell transplantation using B16-loaded S-cryoMNs, the delivered cells were visualized at the basal of epidermis and dermis, ranging from ~ 50 µm to 200 µm. On day 3, the delivered B16 remained viable for melanin production at a comparable level with dermabrasion treated group.

We also applied melanocytes (Mela)-loaded S-cryoMNs (characterization details shown in Figure S13A&B) for intradermal transplantation of melanocytes. Each mouse received four treatments on four different dorsal sites at day 0, including untreated group, Mela-loaded S-cryoMNs, blank S-cryoMNs, and dermabrasion transplantation treatments (Fig. 5A). In dermabrasion treatment, the epidermis was mechanically removed to expose the super cial dermis for receiving melanocyte suspension to achieve a melanocytes density of ~ 250 cells/mm 2 , which was consistent with Mela-loaded S-cryoMNs (~ 220 cells/ mm 2 ) [39,40]. The Mela-loaded S-cryoMNs were pressed on mice skin and removed until patches melted and softened. At day 1 after treatment, the melanocytes delivered by S-cryoMNs were visualized in mice skin from epidermis to dermis (depth up to ~ 300 µm), majorly residing in the basal layer of the epidermis and around the hair follicles (indicated by red arrows in Fig. 5D). 3 days post S-cryoMNs transplantation, the delivered melanocytes remained viable for melanin production. There is no signi cant loss in cell numbers according to the semiquantitative analysis based on histological images (Fig. 5E). The Mela-loaded S-cryoMNs showed similar therapeutic effectiveness for intradermal transplantation of melanocytes compared to dermabrasion technique. In contrast, the dermabrasion method exhibited much greater invasiveness, in which the epidermis was destroyed at day 1 and the scab was formed at day 3 as shown in Fig. 5D.

## OVA-DC S-cryoMNs for in vivo cancer vaccination

Dendritic cells (DCs) are potent antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to capture and present antigens to T lymphocytes for long-lasting and speci c immune memory. And autologous dendritic cells have been applied for developing vaccines in clinical. We developed the DCs-loaded S-cryoMNs and tested its potential capability for vaccination on the mouse model. DCs were pulsed with ovalbumin (OVA) as the model antigen [41] and examined for the surface markers of mature and active DCs (i.e., CD11c, CD86, and MHCII). Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) pulsed DCs acted as the positive control here (Figure S14A).

Speci cally, OVA stimulation generated 63.5 ± 6.9% of CD11c + CD86 + DCs and 68.8 ± 9.1% CD11c + MHCII + DCs, which showed a comparable level with the LPS-pulsed DCs (72.4 ± 12.0% of CD11c + CD86 + DCs, 74.6 ± 8.2% of CD11c + MHCII + DCs). After loaded into S-cryoMNs (OVA-DCs S-cryoMNs), the OVA-DCs kept high viability after short-term (83.1%, 1 week in -80 ºC) and long-term (77.2% for 1-month storage in liquid nitrogen; 63.4% for 3-month storage in liquid nitrogen) storage (Figure S14B&C).

We optimized the dosage and application frequency of OVA-DCs S-cryoMNs vaccination. The healthy mice received subcutaneous (s.c.) vaccination twice a week with different dosages of 0, 1, 2, 8 × 10 5 OVA-DCs in each treatment. The levels of OVA-speci c antibodies in the blood signi cantly increased at the third week and saturated after eight times of treatments (Figure S15). And the dosage at 2 × 10 5 OVA-DCs showed the best antigen-speci c immune response. Therefore, we used S-cryoMNs with 2 × 10 5 OVA-DCs (two patches each dose, each patch containing 1 × 10 5 OVA-DCs) to vaccinate the mice over four weeks (8 treatments) (Fig. 6A&B). The OVA-DCs S-cryoMNs penetrated mouse skin up to ~ 200 µm in the dermis area as shown in Fig. 6C. After one dose of OVA-DCs S-cryoMNs, the prelabeled OVA-DCs were observed in the draining lymph nodes (Figure S16A&B). At day 28, the mice were inoculated with B16-OVA melanoma. The tumors were measured every 2 days and excised at day 24 post tumor inoculation. As shown in Fig. 6D&E  The vaccinated mice had a higher percentage of CD11c + CD86 + DCs (2.16 ± 0.23% vs 1.22 ± 0.24% of blank S-cryoMNs group) and a higher percentage of CD11c + MHCII + DCs (1.04 ± 0.32% vs. 0.72 ± 0.26% of blank S-cryoMNs group) in excised draining lymph nodes (Fig. 6F andS18). The splenocytes are collected from vaccinated mice and restimulated with OVA, in which OVA-DCs S-cryoMNs vaccinated mice has shown a signi cant higher proliferation rate (about 1.3-fold higher than blank S-cryoMNs group, Fig. 6G) and higher secretion levels of IFN-γ (736.4 ± 145.1 pg/mL vs. 202.1 ± 33.0 pg/mL of blank S-cryoMNs group, Fig. 6H). As shown in Fig. 6I, it induced signi cantly greater OVA-speci c cytotoxic activity of splenic T lymphocytes after vaccination using OVA-DCs S-cryoMNs than that of blank S-cryoMNs. The above results suggested that vaccination with OVA-DCs S-cryoMNs could induce potent antigen-speci c immune responses and showed a strong antitumorigenic ability.

S-cryoMNs were safe through the whole experiment period. Every thumb-press of S-cryoMNs left a clear micropattern on the mouse skin, which visually disappeared within 1 hr (Figure S19A). There was no obvious skin damage. After 8 times application of S-cryoMNs over 1 month, we excised the skin and carried H&E staining and did not see any increased in ltration of in ammatory cells in skin tissue (Figure S19B). This frequent administration of S-cryoMNs induced neither weight loss (Figure S19C) nor pathological damages of major organs (Figure S19D).

## Discussion

The idea of S-cryoMNs was inspired by the porous sponge structure that can rapidly absorb aqueous solution and kept its original structure. This sponge-like structure allowed the absorption of the cell suspension through the capillary force during the wetting and the maintenance of MN morphology (Figure S7). This facilitates the future large-scale fabrication and distribution of the porous MN scaffold that can be loaded with cells and frozen to S-cryoMNs in situ for the intradermal injection of cells. When MeHA hydrogel was used to make the porous MN scaffold, a two-step UV crosslinking was carried (Fig. 2). The rst crosslinking in the PDMS mold was to achieve the proper pore size to accommodate the therapeutic cells. The second crosslinking was carried on MeHA MNs peeled off from the mold. The extra crosslinking was to minimize the swelling of the porous structure when loaded with the cell suspension, which also serves to adjust the degradation behavior of the scaffold to achieve desirable release pro les (Figure S9).

The porous MN scaffold-assisted fast loading methods were proposed to minimize the steps from cell harvest to cell delivery. The porous MN scaffold can rapidly absorb the therapeutic cell suspension and later frozen into solid status for S-cryoMNs. The cryoprotective medium was formulated with a low concentration of DMSO and biocompatible polymers (i.e., PEG, HES, MC, and CMC) to achieve low toxicity while maintaining good cryoprotection for various types of cells (i.e., broblasts, HaCaT, A375, hMSCs, melanocytes, B16, and DCs) (Fig. 3A, S13, and S14B). We notice that there are other types of cryoprotectant agents like sugars, polysaccharides, and proteins. We chose polymers because of their relatively low cost, batch-to-batch consistency, and easy accessibility.

The potential applications of S-cryoMNs were shown through three clinically relevant in vitro and in vivo models. The rst one is hMSC delivery for wound healing. [28,29]. The delivered hMSCs promoted the cell migration in the scratch assay and endothelial tube formation assay (Fig. 4B&C). The second example is the delivery of melanocytes for vitiligo treatment in vivo (Fig. 5). We examined the delivery of both mice melanoma cells and human primary melanocytes and proved it potential capability to restore melanin levels in the mouse skin. The third example is delivery of antigen-pulsed DCs for cancer immunotherapy. After in vivo vaccination using antigen-pulsed DCs S-cryoMNs, it could induce strong antigen-speci c immune responses and signi cantly delay the growth of melanoma (Fig. 6).

While S-cyoMNs have addressed the issues faced by the rst generation of cryoMNs, it also faces some speci c challenges or further improvement. The rst is the speed of cell release. The rst generation of cryoMNs dissolves in skin in a few seconds, which is slight too fast for clinical practice. S-cryoMNs release cells along the melting and degradation (Figure S9A&B) and the degradation behavior of porous MN scaffold could be tuned by adjusting second crosslinking to achieve desirable release pro le. In the future, we need further opitimize the crosslinking condition and look for other potential scaffold materials, which realizes the dissolvation and drug release in 2-5 min in the skin. Secondly, S-cryoMNs are still applied through thumb-press. This would result in different penetration depths in skin at different locations or by different operators(e.g., results in Fig. 3G&H and Figure S10 are very different). We hope there will be an applicator that can achieve the consistent penetration of MNs by automatically adjusting the pressing force based on the real-time measurement of skin mechanical properties.

## Conclusion

This article reported S-cryoMNs that aimed to address the limitations of rst generation of cryoMNs. S-cryoMNs were made through dipping a porous MN scaffold in the cell suspension before cryopreservation. The porous scaffold can be transported at room temperature and researchers can load any type of cells with the optimized cryogenic medium. As a proof-of-concept, we have examined the loading and intradermal delivery of three cell types that are clinically relevant in vitro and in vivo models including hMSC for wound healing, melanocytes for vitiligo treatment, and DCs for cancer vaccination. We believe this new version of cryoMNs would facilitate the adoption of MN technologies in the eld of cell therapy and regenerative medicine. Synthesis of MeHA: HA was methacrylated by following the published protocol [11]. Brie y, 1.0 g of HA (Mw = 300 kDa or 48 kDa) was dissolved in the 50 mL of deionized water at 4°C until complete dissolution. 33 mL DMF was then added into the HA solution to achieve the water/DMF mixture (3:2, v/v).

## Materials and

1.22 g MAA was subsequently added drop wisely into the solution while the pH was maintained at 8-9.

The reaction was left overnight with continuous stirring at 4°C. Later, 2.46 g NaCl and pure ethanol were added sequentially to precipitate the product (i.e., MeHA). The crude product was collected through centrifuge and re-dissolved in deionized water. The puri cation of MeHA was conducted by dialysis against deionized water for 7 days. The puri ed product was obtained by lyophilization and stored at 4°C.

MeHA was characterized by 1 H NMR spectroscopy (Bruker Avance II 300MHz NMR) for modi cation degree.

### Fabrication of porous MeHA MNs

The stainless-steel MN mold (Micropoint Technologies Pte Ltd, Singapore) has the base diameter of 300 µm, the tip radius of 5 µm, and the tip height of 1200 µm. To fabricate the negative mold, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS, 10 mm thick, Dow Corning 184 Sylgard) was poured over the master template to replicate the structure. After degassing by vacuum oven, the PDMS was cured at 70°C for 1 hr and carefully peeled off from the template.

To fabricate the porous structure, MeHA (Mw = 48 kDA or 300 kDa) was mixed with the photoinitiator (Irgacure 2959) at the mass ratio of 100:1 and dissolved in deionized water. The mixture was casted in the PDMS mold and centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 5 min to ll up the voids. Later, the patch was crosslinked by UV exposure. MNs with the different crosslinking degrees were named as CL3, CL5, CL10, and CL15, de ned by their exposure time to UV for 3, 5, 10, 15 min respectively. Then these MNs were frozen at -40°C and lyophilized. The resulted porous MNs were carefully peeled off from the PDMS mold and crosslinked with UV for 15 min to strengthen the scaffold matrix. The morphology and porous structures of MeHA MNs were examined by a microlens-equipped digital camera and eld-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JEOL JSM-6700, Japan). The porosity of MNs was analyzed using ImageJ software. For each type of porous MNs, three independent images with 500X magni cation were analyzed. The scaffold area was distinguished by the software, the porosity of each porous MN was calculated according to the following equation.

Where the A total and A scaffold are the areas of the whole image and the scaffold part.

### Cell culture

Human dermal broblasts (CellResearch Corporation Pte Ltd), human hypertrophic scar broblast (HSF, CellResearch Corporation Pte Ltd) human immortalized keratinocytes (HaCaT, Lonza), human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC, Lonza), and human malignant melanoma cell line (A375, ATCC were cultured in high-glucose Dulbecco's Modi ed Eagle's Medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS),100 units/mL penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC, Lonza) were cultured in EGM TM -2 endothelial cell growth medium (EGM-2, Lonza) supplemented with 5% FBS. The cells were grown under 5% CO 2 at 37 ºC with the medium replaced every two or three days.

### Optimization of cryoprotective medium

Cryoprotective medium was prepared by dissolving polymers (HA, gelatin, alginic acid, chitosan, MC, CMC, PEG, and HES) and DMSO at the designed concentrations (0, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.5 wt.% for polymers; 0, 1, 2 v/v % for DMSO) in Dulbecco's Phosphate-Buffered Saline (DPBS, Gibco). Human dermal broblasts were used for testing the cryoprotective effect of the freezing medium. After broblasts reached the con uency over 90%, the cells were trypsinized and suspended in the freezing medium at the concentration of 2×10 5 cells/ml. The cells were cryopreserved by gradient freezing and nally stored at -80 ºC ultra-low freezer for 72 hr. Later, the cells were thawed in a 37 ºC water bath and seeded on the 96 well-plate and 48 well-plate using a fresh complete medium. After culturing for 24 hr, the cells were imaged by phase contrast microscope and viability was accessed using the AlamarBlue™ cell viability assay. The cells cryopreserved in 10 v/v% DMSO under the same experimental condition were adopted as the positive control. The relative cell viability in each cryoprotective medium was calculated by normalized with positive control.

Fabrication of S-cryoMNs through dipping method with the porous MNs

The porous MN scaffolds were sterilized by UV for 30 min before the operation. Cells (e.g., hMSCs, A375, B16, melanocytes, and DCs) were rstly suspended in cryoprotective solutions at the density of 1 × 10 6 cells/ml or other stated density. The porous MNs were soaked in the 100 µL of cell suspension with tip facing downwards for 1 min to fully absorbed the solution. The cell-loaded S-cryoMNs were placed inside the cryopreservation box and frozen under - 80 ºC for 1 day. The prepared S-cryoMNs were nally stored in liquid nitrogen.

### Wound healing scratch assay

The capability of cell migration towards the wounded area was assessed using the scratch assay. The dermal broblasts were seeded in the bottom layer of the 48-well transwell (Costar®) at 90% con uency and cultured overnight. The linear defect on broblasts monolayer was created by scratching with a 1000 µL pipette tip. After scratching, the damaged monolayer was washed twice with the DPBS buffer and changed to 1.5 mL of low serum culture medium each well (i.e.,1% FBS for negative control group, and 5% FBS for positive control group, blank S-cryoMNs treatment, and hMSCs-loaded S-cryoMNs treatments group, n = 3). For S-cryoMNs treatment groups, each blank or hMSCs-loaded S-cryoMNs patches were dissolved in a 200 µL culture medium and transferred into one transwell insert. For the positive control group, the low serum culture medium was supplemented with 20 ng/mL transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 to accelerate broblast proliferation. The bright-eld image of the wounded area at the designed time points (i.e., 0, 24, 48 hr after treatment) was recorded with the Olympus IX71 inverted microscope. The width of the linear defect was measured using the ImageJ software. The wound closure was calculated by the following equation

### Endothelial cell tube formation assay

The capability of hMSCs-loaded MNs in promoting angiogenesis was assessed using the endothelial cell tube formation assay. The HUVECs were per-stained with the CellTracker™ one night before the tube formation assay. The Matrigel® Matrix Basement Membrane (Corning) was applied to coat the well plate. Brie y, 100µL of Matrigel® Matrix was added to each well of the 48-well plate and solidi ed overnight at 37°C. Each well of tube formation contained 40,000 of the stained HUVECs in 300 µL of EGM-2 medium (1.5% FBS for negative control group, and 5% FBS for the positive control group, blank S-cryoMNs treatment, and hMSCs-loaded S-cryoMNs treatments group, n = 3). In the positive control group, the EGM-2 medium was additionally supplemented with 40 ng/mL of VEGF to promote the formation of tubelike structures. For S-cryoMNs treatment groups, one blank or hMSCs-loaded S-cryoMNs patches were dissolved in each well. After 24 hr incubation, the bright eld and uorescence images of each group were recorded with the Olympus IX71 inverted microscope. The total length of the tube, number of the tubes, and the branch points were measured using ImageJ to quantify the angiogenetic potential of each treatment. and each group was sacri ced at designated time points of day 1 and day 3 for histological analysis. After being anesthetized, four treatments were performed on the back of each mouse: untreated (upper left ank), dermabrasion (upper right ank), B16-loaded S-cryoMNs (lower left ank), and blank S-cryoMNs (lower right ank). For dermabrasion treatment, the skin was sterilized and then scratched using a surgical blade until the tiny bleeding spots appears. Later, about 25 µL of B16 cell suspension at a concentration of 2×10 6 cells/mL was carefully applied on the wounded area. After cell suspension solution absorbed for 5 min, the treatment site was protected using a Tegaderm™ lm (3M™, China). For B16-loaded S-cryoMNs groups, the application sites were disinfected and applied with 2 patches to deliver approximately 4×10 3 B16 cells per mouse. Two patches of blank S-cryoMNs only containing cryopreservation medium were applied on the lower right ank of back skin for each mouse. After S-cryoMNs application, the treatment sites were covered with a Tegaderm™ lm for protection.

The Mela-loaded S-cryoMNs were applied for melanocytes delivery using a similar protocol, in which only the dosage of the melanocyte was modi ed. In melanocytes delivery, 25 µL of melanocytes suspension at 1×10 6 cells/mL was used in dermabrasion treatment, and approximately 2×10 3 melanocytes were delivered using Mela-loaded S-cryoMNs for each mouse. The dosage of the melanocytes for dermabrasion and Mela-loaded cryoMNs were determined to achieve the melanocytes density of ~ 250 cells/mm 2 after application. At day 1 and day 3, three mice were sacri ced at each timepoint and harvested for their skin. The skin sections were stained using Masson-Fontana staining kit (Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology Co., Ltd, China) to visualize the melanin expression from transplanted B16 and melanocytes.

Preparation and antigen stimulation of bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs)

BMDCs were isolated from bone of C57BL/6 mice with previous Brie y, the femur bones were dissected, and the bone marrow was collected. Later the red blood cells were lysed using ACK lysing buffer. The cells were resuspended at the concentration of 1 × 10 6 cells/mL and cultured in complete RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with GM-CSF (PeproTech) and IL-4 (PeproTech) and replaced with fresh medium every 2 days. On the 7th day, non-adherent and loosely adherent cells were collected and pulsed with 100 µg/mL LPS and 50 µg/mL OVA for 24 hr to obtain LPS-pulsed and OVA-pulsed DCs, respectively.

Determination of OVA-speci c immunoglobulin levels using ELISA assay: tail blood was collected, and plasma was separated by centrifugation using 1000 g for 15 min at 4 ºC. Brie y, Nunc™

MaxiSorb™ ELISA plate (Biolengend Inc.) was coated with 50 µL 5 µg/mL OVA for 16-18 hr and later was blocked with 1.0% BSA for 1 hr at room temperature. 50 µL of diluted plasma (1:100) was added into each well of the coated plate. After 1 hr incubation and wash, HRP Goat anti-mouse IgG (1:2000 dilution, BioLegend Inc.) was added to the plate and incubated for 1 hr. The TMB substrate was added to develop color and later quanti ed by the absorbance at 450 nm (SpectraMAX® M5e Microplate Reader).

In vivo vaccination using OVA-DCs S-cryoMNs: The experiment was performed on C57BL/6 mice (male, in with ethical approval by the Animal Research Ethics Sub-Committee of City University of Hong Kong with reference no. of A-0493. The animals were purchased from the Laboratory Animal Research Unit of City University of Hong Kong. They were housed in ventilated caging systems in a 12:12 hr LD cycle at constant temperature and humidity. The mice were randomly allocated to two treatment groups: blank and OVA-DCs S-cryoMNs group, n = 4. Each mouse received vaccination twice a week for total of eight doses, in which 2 × 10 5 OVA-DCs were administrated in each treatment of OVA-DCs S-cryoMNs group. After S-cryoMNs application, the treatment sites were covered with a Tegaderm™ lm for protection, which was removed together with the S-cryoMNs after 8 hr. At day 28, the mice were sacri ced and collected for their lymph nodes, spleens, skin, and major organs. The lymphocytes from excised lymph nodes were stained for surface markers (i.e., CD11c, MHCII, and CD86) of mature DCs to evaluate the homing effects of the delivered OVA-DCs vaccines. The splenocytes were obtained from excised spleens and restimulated using OVA to evaluate the speci c proliferation and IFN-γ secretion with the presence of model antigen. The proliferation assay was performed using AlamarBlue™ viability assay and IFN-γ was measured using mouse IFN-γ ELISA kit (Biolegend Inc., USA). The OVA-speci c lysis of cytotoxic T lymphocytes was later determined. The splenocytes and B16-OVA were co-cultured with the ratios of 10:1, 33:1, and 100:1 in U-bottom 96 well-plate for 2 hr. The lysed B16-OVA was determined by CyQUANT™ LDH cytotoxicity assay kit (ThermoFisher Scienti c). The treated and untreated skin and major organs were xed using 4% paraformaldehyde and cryosectioned for histological analysis.   In vivomelanin-secreting cell delivery B16-loaded and Mela-loaded S-cryoMNs:A) Timeline of delivering B16 melanoma cells and human primary melanocytes on the immunode cient mouse model.

The dermabrasion method was adopted to be compared with the S-cryoMNs delivery methods. B) Melanin expression and C) quantitative analysis from the transplanted B16 cells using dermabrasion, blank or B16-loaded S-cryoMNs methods after one-and three-day post application. The melanin was stained by Masson-Fontana staining and indicated using the red arrow. For each time point, three independent samples were analyzed. D) Melanin expression and E) quantitative analysis from the transplanted melanocytes and using dermabrasion, blank or Mela-loaded S-cryoMNs methods after oneand three-day post-application. The melanin was stained by Masson-Fontana staining and indicated using the red arrow. The scab was indicated using green arrow.  

### Acknowledgements

CX acknowledges the funding support from internal grant from City University of Hong Kong (#7020029), General Research Fund (GRF) from the Research Grants Council (RGC) of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No.: CityU11202222). WL acknowledges the funding support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (31870967, 81671921).

## Con ict of Interests

We declare no con ict of interest.

The second generation cryomicroneedles (S-cryoMNs) fabricated through the dipping method with the porous MN scaffold for the intradermal cell delivery. 

## Supplementary Files

This is a list of supplementary les associated with this preprint. Click to download.

