# DESCRIPTION

## BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

### Field of the Invention

The invention relates generally to cancer and more specifically to methods of enhancing immunity by modulating CD11b activity or expression.

### Background Information

Macrophages, monocytes, neutrophils, and other myeloid cells play important roles during acute and chronic inflammation. Pro-inflammatory myeloid cells stimulate cytotoxic T cells to suppress infectious disease and tumor growth, while immune suppressive myeloid cells promote tumor progression and wound healing. During acute and chronic inflammation, macrophages express pro-inflammatory cytokines, as well as reactive nitrogen and oxygen species that can kill pathogens as well as normal cells. In contrast, in neoplastic and parasitic diseases, macrophages and immature monocytes and granulocytes (myeloid-derived suppressor cells) express cytokines that induce immune suppression, angiogenesis and cancer progression.

Macrophages isolated from murine and human tumors exhibit an immunosuppressive phenotype that may be induced by cytokines expressed in the tumor microenvironment, such as IL-10 or TGF-β which can induce M2-like macrophage polarization in vitro. The cytokine profile of the tumor microenvironment is therefore extremely important to the phenotype of the local macrophage. Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor (mCSF) and its receptor CSF1R play important roles in macrophage and monocyte survival in vitro and in vivo, and CSF1R inhibitors are currently in clinical development for cancer therapy.

Although it is well established that tumor associated macrophages (TAM) are abundant within the tumor microenvironment and play essential roles in tumor immune suppression and tumor progression, the molecular mechanisms that regulate these tumor-promoting functions of TAMs remain incompletely clear. However, recent studies have shown that signaling pathways regulated by integrins, CSF1R, PI3Kγ and BTK control myeloid cell trafficking into tumors as well as macrophage polarization and inhibitors of these molecules are also in clinical development for cancer therapy.

Myeloid cells as well as lymphocytes rely on cell adhesion receptors for trafficking into inflamed tissues and tumors. Previous studies on tumor inflammation revealed that immune cell adhesion receptors play critical roles during tumor progression. These studies found that myeloid cell integrin, αMβ2 (CD11b/CD18), a receptor for complement fibrinogen, and endothelial cell ICAM-1, is not required for adhesion to endothelium or trafficking into tumors. In contrast, CD11b/CD18 has been shown to mediate macrophage adhesion, migration, chemotaxis and accumulation during inflammation. Accordingly, a need exists for novel methods of treating cancer that focus on the role that integrin CD11b plays during inflammation.

## SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

The present invention is based on the finding that CD11b signaling inhibits immune suppression, modulates neovascularization and promotes anti-tumor immune responses in models of murine and human cancer.

In one aspect, the invention provides a method of treating cancer in a subject. The method includes administering to a subject in need thereof, a therapeutically effective amount of one or more agonists of CD11b expression. In various embodiments, the subject is human, and the cancer is selected from the group consisting of breast cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer, hepatocellular cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, cervical cancer, ovarian cancer, liver cancer, bladder cancer, cancer of the urinary tract, thyroid cancer, renal cancer, carcinoma, melanoma, head and neck cancer, and brain cancer. In various embodiments, the agonist of CD11b activity or expression is an antibody, protein or small molecule, such as, for example, miRNA Let7a or leukadherin 1 (LA1). In various embodiments, the one or more agonists of CD11b activity or expression are administered in combination with one or more chemotherapeutic agents. In various embodiments, the chemotherapeutic agent is gemcitabine, pembrolizumab, nivolumab, cemiplimab, atezolizumab, avelumab, durvalumab, or ipilimumab.

In yet another aspect, the invention provides a method of treating cancer. The method includes a therapeutically effective amount of anti-miRNA Let7a in combination with one or more chemotherapeutic agents. In various embodiments, the subject is human and the cancer is selected from the group consisting of breast cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer, hepatocellular cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, cervical cancer, ovarian cancer, liver cancer, bladder cancer, cancer of the urinary tract, thyroid cancer, renal cancer, carcinoma, melanoma, head and neck cancer, and brain cancer. In various embodiments, the subject is human, and the cancer may be breast cancer or lung cancer. In various embodiments, the anti-miRNA Let7a may be administered in combination with an agonist of CD11b activity or expression such as, for example, miRNA Let7a or leukadherin 1 (LA1). In various embodiments, the chemotherapeutic agent is gemcitabine, pembrolizumab, nivolumab, cemiplimab, atezolizumab, avelumab, durvalumab, or ipilimumab.

In yet another aspect, the invention provides a transgenic non-human mammal whose genome comprises a mutation at Ile332 of exon 9 of the ITGAM gene, wherein the transgenic non-human mammal has the phenotype of loss of the Exon-9 Bgl II restriction site. In various embodiments, the transgenic non-human mammal is a mouse and the Ile332 is substituted with Gly. The invention also provides an isolated cell derived from the transgenic non-human mammal.

In yet another aspect, the invention provides a method of enhancing immunity and/or increasing susceptibility of a cancer cell to treatment with a chemotherapeutic agent. The method includes detecting cancer associated myeloid cells in a sample comprising cancer cells from the subject, contacting the sample with an agonist of CD11b or Let7a and detecting increased levels of CD11b or Let7a as compared to the levels of CD11b or Let7a prior to the contacting, thereby enhancing immunity and/or increasing susceptibility of the cancer cells to treatment with a chemotherapeutic agent. In various embodiments, the chemotherapeutic agent is gemcitabine. In various embodiments, the method further includes detecting an increase in expression of one or more of Arg1, Tgfb, Il10, Il6 or Pdgfb after contacting with the agonist of CD11b or Let7a, as compared to expression prior to contacting. In various embodiments, the method further includes detecting a decrease in expression of one or more of Il12, Ifng, Nos2, or Tnfa after contacting with the agonist of CD11b or Let7a, as compared to expression prior to contacting.

In yet another aspect, the invention provides a method of rendering a cancer cell susceptible to chemotherapeutic treatment. The method includes contacting tumor associated macrophages obtained from a sample comprising the cancer cell with an agonist of CD11 b or Let7a activity or expression, thereby rendering the cancer cell susceptible to chemotherapeutic treatment. In various embodiments, the agonist of CD11b activity or expression is an antibody, protein or small molecule, such as, for example, miRNA Let7a or leukadherin 1 (LA1).

In another aspect, the invention provides a method of screening for a therapeutic agent for treating cancer. The method includes administering a test agent to the transgenic non-human mammal described herein and evaluating the effect of the test agent on at least one of expression levels of CD11b or Let7a in at least one disease-relevant tissue of the transgenic non-human mammal, wherein at least one of: an increase in the amount of CD11b expression, an increase in the amount of Let7a expression, or increase in the amount of CD11b expression and an increase in the amount of Let7a expression in at least one disease-relevant tissue relative to a similar transgenic non-human mammal that does not receive the test agent indicates the test agent is therapeutic for the cancer. In various embodiments, the method also includes detecting increases in expression of one or more of Il1b, Tnfa, Il12, Nos2 and Ifng in at least one disease-relevant tissue relative to a similar transgenic non-human mammal that does not receive the test agent, thereby confirming that the test agent is therapeutic for the cancer.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION

The present invention is based on the observation that CD11b signaling in myeloid cells inhibits immune suppression, modulates neovascularization and promotes anti-tumor immune responses in models of murine and human cancer.

Before the present compositions and methods are described, it is to be understood that this invention is not limited to particular compositions, methods, and experimental conditions described, as such compositions, methods, and conditions may vary. It is also to be understood that the terminology used herein is for purposes of describing particular embodiments only, and is not intended to be limiting, since the scope of the present invention will be limited only in the appended claims.

As used in this specification and the appended claims, the singular forms “a”, “an”, and “the” include plural references unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. Thus, for example, references to “the method” includes one or more methods, and/or steps of the type described herein which will become apparent to those persons skilled in the art upon reading this disclosure and so forth.

The term “comprising,” which is used interchangeably with “including,” “containing,” or “characterized by,” is inclusive or open-ended language and does not exclude additional, unrecited elements or method steps. The phrase “consisting of” excludes any element, step, or ingredient not specified in the claim. The phrase “consisting essentially of” limits the scope of a claim to the specified materials or steps and those that do not materially affect the basic and novel characteristics of the claimed invention. The present disclosure contemplates embodiments of the invention compositions and methods corresponding to the scope of each of these phrases. Thus, a composition or method comprising recited elements or steps contemplates particular embodiments in which the composition or method consists essentially of or consists of those elements or steps.

Unless defined otherwise, all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this invention belongs. Although any methods and materials similar or equivalent to those described herein can be used in the practice or testing of the invention, the preferred methods and materials are now described.

The terms “cancer,” “neoplasm,” and “tumor” are used interchangeably herein to refer to cells which exhibit autonomous, unregulated growth, such that they exhibit an aberrant growth phenotype characterized by a significant loss of control over cell proliferation. In general, cells of interest for detection, analysis, classification, or treatment in the present invention include precancerous (e.g., benign), malignant, pre-metastatic, metastatic, and non-metastatic cells. Examples of cancer include, but are not limited to, breast cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer, hepatocellular cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, cervical cancer, ovarian cancer, liver cancer, bladder cancer, cancer of the urinary tract, thyroid cancer, renal cancer, carcinoma, melanoma, head and neck cancer, and brain cancer.

A “subject,” “individual,” or “patient,” is used interchangeably herein, which refers to a vertebrate, preferably a mammal, more preferably a human. Mammals include, but are not limited to, murines, simians, humans, farm animals, sport animals, and pets. Tissues, cells and their progeny of a biological entity obtained in vitro or cultured in vitro are also encompassed.

The term “biological sample,” refers to any sample taken from a participant, including but not limited to cells, blood, tissue, skin, urine, etc.

The term “pharmaceutically acceptable,” when used in reference to a carrier, is meant that the carrier, diluent or excipient must be compatible with the other ingredients of the formulation and not deleterious to the recipient thereof

The terms “administration” or “administering” are defined to include an act of providing a compound or pharmaceutical composition of the invention to a subject in need of treatment. The phrases “parenteral administration” and “administered parenterally” as used herein means modes of administration other than enteral and topical administration, usually by injection, and includes, without limitation, intravenous, intramuscular, intraarterial, intrathecal, intracapsular, intraorbital, intracardiac, intradermal, intraperitoneal, transtracheal, subcutaneous, subcuticular, intraarticulare, subcapsular, subarachnoid, intraspinal and intrasternal injection and infusion. The phrases “systemic administration,” “administered systemically,” “peripheral administration” and “administered peripherally” as used herein mean the administration of a compound, drug or other material other than directly into the central nervous system, such that it enters the subject's system and, thus, is subject to metabolism and other like processes, for example, subcutaneous administration or administration via intranasal delivery.

The term “effective amount” or “therapeutically effective amount” refers to the amount of an active agent sufficient to induce a desired biological result. That result may be alleviation of the signs, symptoms, or causes of a disease, or any other desired alteration of a biological system, including inhibition or reduction in cancer cell growth and/or induction of cancer cell death (i.e., apoptosis). Thus, the term “therapeutically effective amount” is used herein to denote any amount of the formulation which causes a substantial improvement in a disease condition when applied to the affected areas repeatedly over a period of time. The amount will vary with the condition being treated, the stage of advancement of the condition, and the type and concentration of formulation applied. Appropriate amounts in any given instance will be readily apparent to those skilled in the art or capable of determination by routine experimentation. In some embodiments, the “effective amount” may be administered before, during, and/or after any treatment regimens for cancer.

As used herein, “treatment” or “treating,” or “palliating” or “ameliorating” are used interchangeably herein. These terms refer to an approach for obtaining beneficial or desired results including but not limited to therapeutic benefit and/or a prophylactic benefit. By therapeutic benefit is meant eradication or amelioration of the underlying disorder being treated. Also, a therapeutic benefit is achieved with the eradication or amelioration of one or more of the physiological symptoms associated with the underlying disorder such that an improvement is observed in the patient, notwithstanding that the patient may still be afflicted with the underlying disorder. For prophylactic benefit, the compositions may be administered to a patient at risk of developing a particular disease, or to a patient reporting one or more of the physiological symptoms of a disease, even though a diagnosis of this disease may not have been made. Treatment includes preventing the disease, that is, causing the clinical symptoms of the disease not to develop by administration of a protective composition prior to the induction of the disease; suppressing the disease, that is, causing the clinical symptoms of the disease not to develop by administration of a protective composition after the inductive event but prior to the clinical appearance or reappearance of the disease; inhibiting the disease, that is, arresting the development of clinical symptoms by administration of a protective composition after their initial appearance; preventing re-occurring of the disease and/or relieving the disease, that is, causing the regression of clinical symptoms by administration of a protective composition after their initial appearance. For purposes of this invention, beneficial or desired clinical results include, but are not limited to, treatment of cancer, such as breast cancer.

As used herein, “promote” or “increase,” or “promoting” or “increasing” are used interchangeably herein. These terms refer to the increase in a measured parameter (e.g., activity, expression, signal transduction, neuron degeneration) in a treated cell (tissue or subject) in comparison to an untreated cell (tissue or subject). A comparison can also be made of the same cell or tissue or subject between before and after treatment. The increase is sufficient to be detectable. In some embodiments, the increase in the treated cell is at least about 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 1-fold, 2-fold, 3-fold, 4-fold or more in comparison to an untreated cell.

As used herein, “inhibit,” “prevent” or “reduce,” or “inhibiting,” “preventing” or “reducing” are used interchangeably herein. These terms refer to the decrease in a measured parameter (e.g., activity, expression, signal transduction, neuron degeneration) in a treated cell (tissue or subject) in comparison to an untreated cell (tissue or subject). A comparison can also be made of the same cell or tissue or subject between before and after treatment. The decrease is sufficient to be detectable. In some embodiments, the decrease in the treated cell is at least about 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, or completely inhibited in comparison to an untreated cell. In some embodiments the measured parameter is undetectable (i.e., completely inhibited) in the treated cell in comparison to the untreated cell.

The term “selective inhibition” or “selectively inhibit” as referred to a biologically active agent refers to the agent's ability to preferentially reduce the target signaling activity as compared to off-target signaling activity, via direct or indirect interaction with the target.

The terms “polypeptide,” “peptide,” and “protein” are used interchangeably herein to refer to a polymer of amino acid residues. The terms apply to amino acid polymers in which one or more amino acid residue is an artificial chemical mimetic of a corresponding naturally occurring amino acid, as well as to naturally occurring amino acid polymers and non-naturally occurring amino acid polymers.

The term “amino acid” refers to naturally occurring and synthetic amino acids, as well as amino acid analogs and amino acid mimetics that function in a manner similar to the naturally occurring amino acids. Naturally occurring amino acids are those encoded by the genetic code, as well as those amino acids that are later modified, e.g., hydroxyproline, α-carboxyglutamate, and O-phosphoserine. Amino acid analogs refers to compounds that have the same basic chemical structure as a naturally occurring amino acid, i.e., an α carbon that is bound to a hydrogen, a carboxyl group, an amino group, and an R group, e.g., homoserine, norleucine, methionine sulfoxide, methionine methyl sulfonium. Naturally encoded amino acids are the 20 common amino acids (alanine, arginine, asparagine, aspartic acid, cysteine, glutamine, glutamic acid, glycine, histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, proline, serine, threonine, tryptophan, tyrosine, and valine) and pyrrolysine and selenocysteine. Amino acids may be referred to herein by either their commonly known three letter symbols or by the one-letter symbols recommended by the IUPAC-IUB Biochemical Nomenclature Commission. Nucleotides, likewise, may be referred to by their commonly accepted single-letter codes.

As used herein, a “protein coding sequence” or a sequence that encodes a particular protein or polypeptide, is a nucleic acid sequence that is transcribed into mRNA (in the case of DNA) and is translated (in the case of mRNA) into a polypeptide in vitro or in vivo when placed under the control of appropriate regulatory sequences. The boundaries of the coding sequence are determined by a start codon at the 5′ terminus (N-terminus) and a translation stop nonsense codon at the 3′ terminus (C-terminus). A coding sequence can include, but is not limited to, cDNA from eukaryotic mRNA, genomic DNA sequences from eukaryotic DNA, and synthetic nucleic acids. A transcription termination sequence will usually be located 3′ to the coding sequence.

As used herein, a “promoter” is defined as a regulatory DNA sequence generally located upstream of a gene that mediates the initiation of transcription by directing RNA polymerase to bind to DNA and initiating RNA synthesis. A promoter can be a constitutively active promoter (i.e., a promoter that is constitutively in an active/“ON” state), it may be an inducible promoter (i.e., a promoter whose state, active/“ON” or inactive/“OFF”, is controlled by an external stimulus, e.g., the presence of a particular compound or protein), it may be a spatially restricted promoter (i.e., transcriptional control element, enhancer, etc.) (e.g., tissue specific promoter, cell type specific promoter, etc.), and it may be a temporally restricted promoter (i.e., the promoter is in the “ON” state or “OFF” state during specific stages of embryonic development or during specific stages of a biological process. Thus, in various embodiments, the promoter may be a stem cell-specific promoter that drives transgene expression. For example, constitutive promoters of different strengths can be used. Expression vectors and plasmids in accordance with the present invention may include one or more constitutive promoters, such as viral promoters or promoters from mammalian genes that are generally active in promoting transcription. Exemplary promoters include, but are not limited to, human Elongation Factor 1 alpha promoter (EFS), SV40 early promoter, mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter; adenovirus major late promoter (Ad MLP); a herpes simplex virus (HSV) promoter, an endogenous cellular promoter that is heterologous to the gene of interest, a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter such as the CMV immediate early promoter region (CMVIE), a Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) promoter, synthetic promoters, hybrid promoters, and the like.

As used herein, the term “gene” means the deoxyribonucleotide sequences comprising the coding region of a structural gene. A “gene” may also include non-translated sequences located adjacent to the coding region on both the 5′ and 3′ ends such that the gene corresponds to the length of the full-length mRNA. The sequences which are located 5′ of the coding region and which are present on the mRNA are referred to as 5′ non-translated sequences. The sequences which are located 3′ or downstream of the coding region and which are present on the mRNA are referred to as 3′ non-translated sequences. The term “gene” encompasses both cDNA and genomic forms of a gene. A genomic form or clone of a gene contains the coding region interrupted with non-coding sequences termed “introns” or “intervening regions” or “intervening sequences.” Introns are segments of a gene which are transcribed into heterogenous nuclear RNA (hnRNA); introns may contain regulatory elements such as enhancers. Introns are removed or “spliced out” from the nuclear or primary transcript; introns therefore are absent in the messenger RNA (mRNA) transcript. The mRNA functions during translation to specify the sequence or order of amino acids in a nascent polypeptide.

As used herein, a “regulatory gene” or “regulatory sequence” is a nucleic acid sequence that encodes products (e.g., transcription factors) that control the expression of other genes.

As used herein, the terms “functionally linked” and “operably linked” are used interchangeably and refer to a functional relationship between two or more DNA segments, in particular gene sequences to be expressed and those sequences controlling their expression. For example, a promoter/enhancer sequence, including any combination of cis-acting transcriptional control elements is operably linked to a coding sequence if it stimulates or modulates the transcription of the coding sequence in an appropriate host cell or other expression system. Promoter regulatory sequences that are operably linked to the transcribed gene sequence are physically contiguous to the transcribed sequence.

“Conservatively modified variants” applies to both amino acid and nucleic acid sequences. With respect to particular nucleic acid sequences, conservatively modified variants refers to those nucleic acids which encode identical or essentially identical amino acid sequences, or where the nucleic acid does not encode an amino acid sequence, to essentially identical sequences. Because of the degeneracy of the genetic code, a large number of functionally identical nucleic acids encode any given protein. For instance, the codons GCA, GCC, GCG and GCU all encode the amino acid alanine. Thus, at every position where an alanine is specified by a codon, the codon can be altered to any of the corresponding codons described without altering the encoded polypeptide. Such nucleic acid variations are “silent variations,” which are one species of conservatively modified variations. Every nucleic acid sequence herein which encodes a polypeptide also describes every possible silent variation of the nucleic acid. One of skill will recognize that each codon in a nucleic acid (except AUG, which is ordinarily the only codon for methionine, and TGG, which is ordinarily the only codon for tryptophan) can be modified to yield a functionally identical molecule. Accordingly, each silent variation of a nucleic acid which encodes a polypeptide is implicit in each described sequence.

As to amino acid sequences, one of skill will recognize that individual substitutions, deletions or additions to a nucleic acid, peptide, polypeptide, or protein sequence which alters, adds or deletes a single amino acid or a small percentage of amino acids in the encoded sequence is a “conservatively modified variant” where the alteration results in the substitution of an amino acid with a chemically similar amino acid. Conservative substitution tables providing functionally similar amino acids are well known in the art. Such conservatively modified variants are in addition to and do not exclude polymorphic variants, interspecies homologs, and alleles of the invention.

The term “antibody” as used herein refers to polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies and fragments thereof, and immunologic binding equivalents thereof. The term “antibody” refers to a homogeneous molecular entity, or a mixture such as a polyclonal serum product made up of a plurality of different molecular entities, and broadly encompasses naturally-occurring forms of antibodies (for example, IgG, IgA, IgM, IgE) and recombinant antibodies such as single-chain antibodies, chimeric and humanized antibodies and multi-specific antibodies. The term “antibody” also refers to fragments and derivatives of all of the foregoing, and may further comprise any modified or derivatized variants thereof that retains the ability to specifically bind an epitope. Antibody derivatives may comprise a protein or chemical moiety conjugated to an antibody. A monoclonal antibody is capable of selectively binding to a target antigen or epitope. Antibodies may include, but are not limited to polyclonal antibodies, monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), humanized or chimeric antibodies, camelized antibodies, single chain antibodies (scFvs), Fab fragments, F(ab′)2 fragments, disulfide-linked Fvs (sdFv) fragments, for example, as produced by a Fab expression library, anti-idiotypic (anti-Id) antibodies, intrabodies, nanobodies, synthetic antibodies, and epitope-binding fragments of any of the above.

As used herein, “transgenic organism” refers to an animal in which exogenous DNA has been introduced while the animal is still in its embryonic stage. In most cases, the transgenic approach aims at specific modifications of the genome, e.g., by introducing whole transcriptional units into the genome, or by up- or down-regulating or mutating pre-existing cellular genes. The targeted character of certain of these procedures sets transgenic technologies apart from experimental methods in which random mutations are conferred to the germline, such as administration of chemical mutagens or treatment with ionizing solution. A transgenic organism can include an organism which has a gene knockout or may result for inducing a genetic mutation.

A “genetic knock out” refers to partial or complete suppression of the expression of a protein encoded by an endogenous DNA sequence in a cell. The “knockout” can be affected by targeted deletion of the whole or part of a gene encoding a protein. Alternatively, the transgenic organism can be obtained by the targeted mutation of a functional protein in an embryonic stem cell. As a result, the deletion or mutation may prevent or reduce the expression of the protein in any cell in the whole animal in which it is normally expressed, or results in the expression of a mutant protein having a biological function different than the normal/wild-type protein.

A “genetic knock in” refers to one-for-one substitution of DNA sequence information in a genetic locus or the insertion of sequence information not found within the locus of a cell. Traditionally, knock-in techniques have relied on homologous recombination to drive targeted gene replacement, although other methods using a transposon-mediated system to insert the target gene have been developed. Embryonic stem cells with the modification of interest are implanted into a viable blastocyst, which will grow into a mature chimeric animal with some cells having the original blastocyst cell genetic information and other cells having the modifications introduced to the embryonic stem cells. Subsequent offspring of the chimeric animal will then have the gene knock-in. Other methods of making transgenic animals are also generally known. See, for example, Manipulating the Mouse Embryo, (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y., 1986).

The term “knockout animal” and “transgenic animal”, refer to a transgenic animal wherein a given gene has been suppressed or mutated by recombination with a targeting vector. Similarly, a “knockin animal” refers to a transgenic animal wherein a given gene has been inserted into a specific locus (i.e., targeted insertion) resulting in a gain-of-function mutation. It is to be emphasized that these terms are intended to include all progeny generations. Thus, the founder animal and all F1, F2, F3, and so on, progeny thereof are included.

Animals containing more than one transgenic construct and/or more than one transgene expression construct may be prepared in any of several ways. An exemplary manner of preparation is to generate a series of animals, each containing one of the desired transgenic phenotypes. Such animals are bred together through a series of crosses, backcrosses and selections, to ultimately generate a single animal containing all desired transgenic traits and/or expression constructs, where the animal is otherwise congenic (genetically identical) to the wild type except for the presence of the construct(s) and/or transgene(s).

Accordingly, in one aspect, the invention provides a transgenic non-human mammal such as a mouse whose genome comprises a heterozygous or homozygous replacement of exon 9 of the ITGAM gene in which the Ile332 codon was substituted with Gly, and methods of making the same. In various embodiments, the mouse has the phenotype of loss of the Exon-9 Bgl II restriction site. Also provided is an isolated cell derived from the transgenic non-human mammal.

The amino acid sequences for the Mus musculus (mouse) gene is known in the art. See, for example, Accession No. P05555, ITAM_Mouse, which provides the amino acid sequence (SEQ ID NO: 1):

Macrophages are phagocytes that serve as a first line of defense against pathogenic insults to tissues. These innate immune cells mount proinflammatory responses to pathogens and repair damaged tissues. However, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) express cytokines and chemokines that can suppress antitumor immunity and promote tumor progression. Preclinical studies have identified crucial pathways regulating the recruitment, polarization, and metabolism of TAMs during tumor progression.

It was previously reported that the VCAM receptor integrin α4β1 promotes myeloid cell recruitment from the bone marrow to the tumor microenvironment, thereby promoting immune suppression, angiogenesis and tumor progression2,13-15. In contrast to its role in regulating recruitment of myeloid cells to tissues during acute inflammation16-18, it was found that CD11b (αM β2), a myeloid cell integrin receptor for ICAM-1 and fibrinogen, does not affect myeloid cell recruitment to tumors, as global deletion of CD11b in Itgam−/− mice has no effect on the number of myeloid cells in circulation or in the number of cells recruited to tumors (FIGS. 6 and 7A-7D). Surprisingly, however, it was found that integrin CD11b plays an essential role in regulating macrophage polarization. Itgam−/− macrophages exhibited enhanced immune suppressive gene and protein expression and strongly reduced pro-inflammatory gene and protein expression compared with WT macrophages, whether stimulated under basal, IL-4 or IFNγ/LPS stimulation conditions (FIGS. 1A and 7E-7F).

To determine whether CD11b also regulates macrophage polarization in vivo, F4/80+ TAMs from LLC tumors grown in Itgam−/− and WT mice were isolated and characterized. It was found that Itgam−/− TAMs expressed significantly higher levels of mRNAs associated with immune suppression and angiogenesis, such as Arg1, Tgfb, Il10, Il6 and Pdgfb, and significantly lower expression of genes associated with immune stimulation, such as Ifng, Nos2, and Tnfa than did WT TAMs (FIGS. 1B and 7G).

Transient siRNA-mediated knockdown of CD11b in in vitro cultured macrophages elevated immune suppressive gene expression and decreased immune stimulatory gene expression, effects that are comparable to CD11 b deletion (FIG. 1C), indicating that even transient loss of CD11b controls macrophage immune suppressive gene expression. To address whether CD11b expression or function controls macrophage gene expression, the effect of inhibitory CD11b antibodies on macrophage mRNA expression was examined. Blockade of murine macrophage CD11b mediated attachment to ICAM-1-coated substrates by anti-CD11b neutralizing antibodies also induced immune suppressive mRNA expression in macrophages (FIG. 1D). Similarly, adhesion of macrophages to the integrin α4β1 substrate VCAM-1 or loss of attachment by suspension culture promoted murine and human immune suppressive transcription, while attachment to ICAM-1 coated surfaces promoted immune stimulatory transcription (FIGS. 1E and 1F), indicating that ligation of CD11b controls immune stimulatory macrophage transcription.

The loss of pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in Itgam−/− macrophages suggested that CD11b may regulate activation of pro-inflammatory transcription factors, such as NFκB. It was found that Itgam−/− macrophages exhibited reduced NFκB serine 536 phosphorylation (an indication of reduced activation19) in response to LPS stimulation compared to WT macrophages, suggesting CD11b plays a role in NFκB activation (FIG. 1G). As other studies have implicated CD11b in the promotion of pro-inflammatory responses of monocytes and dendritic cells through direct interactions of LPS with integrin beta2 extracellular domains20,21, the results provided herein indicate that CD11b activation and signaling play key roles in the regulation of macrophage polarization in vitro and in vivo.

Itgam−/− bone marrow-derived and tumor associate macrophages exhibit more immune suppressive transcriptional profiles than WT macrophages. To determine if this difference affects tumor growth, WT or Itgam−/− bone marrow derived or tumor associated macrophages with tumor cells were adoptively transferred into recipient WT or Itgam−/− mice. It has been previously demonstrated that adoptively transferred, immune suppressive BMDM or TAMs can stimulate tumor growth9,10. Remarkably, bone marrow-derived Itgam−/− macrophages (FIG. 1H) as well as tumor-derived Itgam−/− macrophages (FIG. 10 potently stimulated tumor growth compared with WT macrophages in both WT and Itgam−/− mice. As Itgam−/− macrophages exhibit an immune suppressive transcriptional profile (FIG. 1B), and tumors derived from Itgam−/− mice exhibit an overall immune suppressive transcriptional profile (FIG. 1J), these data suggested that CD11b expression or activation might impact overall tumor growth.

Indeed, it was found that subcutaneous (LLC), orthotopic (melanoma) and autochthonous (PyMT) tumors grew more aggressively in Itgam−/− than in WT mice (FIG. 1K). As Itgam−/− mice exhibited substantially more CD4+Foxp3+Tregs and fewer CD8+ T cells in tumors than WT mice (FIGS. 8A-8B), the present data support the conclusion that CD11b plays a key role in regulating the overall immune response in tumors.

Prior studies have shown that Isoleucine 332 in the CD11b molecule serves as an allosteric switch controlling the adhesion receptor's activation and shape22. To determine whether CD11b activation controls tumor development, a constitutively activated CD11b knockin mouse strain (C57BL/6 ITGA-MI332G) was generated by introducing an I332G point mutation in the murine Itgam gene. I332G knockin mice express normal levels of cell surface CD11b on both monocytes and granulocytes and exhibit normal levels of all blood cell level (FIGS. 8C-8D). In vitro adhesion assays with bone marrow derived macrophages from these mice showed that I332G cells express constitutively active CD11b (FIG. 8E). Importantly, I332G Itgam knockin mice exhibited significantly reduced LLC tumor growth (FIG. 1K). Thus, while CD11b deletion stimulates anti-inflammatory macrophage polarization, inhibits CD8+ T cell recruitment and promotes tumor growth, CD11b activation potently inhibits tumor growth. These studies indicate that macrophage CD11b plays a critical functional role in controlling tumor growth.

To determine whether signals associated with the tumor microenvironment can alter CD11b expression and subsequently affect myeloid cell polarization, the effect of macrophage media (mCSF-, IL-4- and IFNγ/LPS) on cell surface CD11b expression in bone marrow derived macrophages was evaluated. While the immune suppressive cytokine IL-4 reduced CD11b expression, the pro-inflammatory stimuli IFNγ/LPS enhanced CD11b surface expression compared to levels expressed on mCSF-stimulated macrophages (FIGS. 9A-9B). Additionally, the immune suppressive factor TGFβ, but not IL-10, inhibited CD11b surface expression (FIG. 9C); TGFβ, IL-4 and tumor cell conditioned medium (TCM) each also suppressed Cd11b mRNA expression (FIG. 9D). Importantly, TGFβ and TCM reduced CD11b cell surface expression and stimulated immune suppressive transcription while inhibiting immune stimulatory transcription in a manner that was reversed by the TGFβR1 inhibitor SB525334 (FIGS. 9E-9G). These data indicate that cytokines such as TGFβ in the tumor microenvironment suppress CD11b expression or activation, thereby promoting immune suppressive macrophage polarization.

Macrophages not only control immune responses, but also induce angiogenesis and desmoplasia by expressing cytokines such as VEGF-A and PDGF-BB, growth factors that regulate endothelial cell and vascular smooth muscles/pericytes during angiogenesis, respectively2. Tumor blood vessels often consist of a single endothelial layer that lacks supporting pericytes or smooth muscle cells; these blood vessels are more numerous in tumors than in normal tissues but are aberrantly formed and poorly perfuse. In contrast, in tumors with high PDGF to VEGF ratios, blood vessels are lined by pericytes, mesenchymal cells that stabilize vessels and promote better tumor perfusion23-27. These tumors grow more rapidly than tumors with lower PDGF to VEGF ratios but also respond better to chemotherapy and immune therapy due to better tumor perfusion24-36. As Itgam−/− macrophages exhibited high PDGF and low VEGF gene expression (FIGS. 1A and 1B), the patterns of blood vessel development in Itgam−/− and WT tumors were examined. An assessment of vascular patterning in LLC and PyMT tumors from WT and Itgam−/− mice showed that Itgam−/− tumors exhibited fewer, longer blood vessels with wider lumens and fewer branch points/field than WT tumors (FIGS. 2A, 2B and 10A). Itgam−/− tumors had more blood vessels that were lined with Desmin+, NG2+, or SMA+ pericytes/smooth muscle cells than did WT tumors (FIGS. 2A-2C and 10B). Accordingly, these vessels were less permeable in Itgam−/− mice than in WT mice, as less intravascular FITC-dextran leaked into the tumor parenchyma (FIGS. 2A-2D). These data indicate that the integrin CD11b plays a role in controlling blood vessel maturation.

It was found that protein and gene expression of PDGF-BB, but not VEGF-A, was strongly enhanced in tumors (FIGS. 2E and 10C). Importantly, PDGF-BB protein expression was also elevated in Itgam−/− tumors and tumor-derived macrophages compared to WT tumors (FIG. 10F). Together, these data suggest that macrophage CD11b controls tumor vascularization through the constitutive expression of elevated levels of PDGF.

In support of these observations on CD11 b roles in neovascularization, it was found that Itgam−/− mice exhibited a well-developed retinal vascular plexus (FIG. 2B; Isolectin B+) at birth (P1) in contrast to WT mice, which exhibit undeveloped retinal vasculature that expands progressively from postnatal day 1 (P1) to P9. The superficial vascular plexus was more developed in Itgam−/− mice than in WT neonates from postnatal day P1 through postnatal day P9 (FIG. 2G). These results indicate that CD11b also controls normal vascular patterning.

To investigate whether elevated PDGF-BB is responsible for the enhanced vascular maturation and tumor growth in Itgam−/− mice, WT and Itgam−/− mice bearing LLC tumors were treated with imatinib, an inhibitor of the PDGF-BB receptor PDGFR1. Imatinib treatment suppressed the enhanced tumor growth and increased vascular normalization observed in Itgam−/− mice (FIGS. 2H-2I). Together these results indicate that CD11 b modulates vascular development through control of PDGF-BB expression.

CD11b may control anti-inflammatory macrophage polarization through the activation of transcription factors such as Stat3, which can promote expression of immune suppressive and pro-angiogenic factors such as Arginase 1, Myc, and VEGF37-39. Itgam−/− macrophages exhibit constitutively phosphorylated Stat3 (FIG. 3A, inset); the high levels of immune suppressive factor expression in Itfam−/− macrophages were reduced to WT macrophage levels by treatment with the Stat3 inhibitor 5,15-DPP (FIG. 3A). Surprisingly, Stat3 inhibition did not affect the high levels of Il6 expression observed in Itgam−/− macrophages (FIG. 3A).

Importantly, IL-6 can directly activate Stat338. It was found that IL-6 promoted the same pattern of immune suppressive polarization in murine and human myeloid cells and macrophages that was observed in Itgam−/− macrophages (FIG. 3B). Together, these results suggested that autocrine IL6 may drive the constitutively immune suppressive polarization observed in Itgam−/− macrophages. In support of this concept, Il6 knockdown decreased expression of constitutive Pdgfb expression in Itgam−/− macrophages (FIG. 3C). As TAMs are a major source of Il6 expression in tumors15, these results suggest that CD11b serves as a natural brake on immune suppression in part through control of myeloid cell transcription of Il6.

Accordingly, the invention provides a method of treating cancer in a subject. The method includes administering to a subject in need thereof, a therapeutically effective amount of an agonist of CD11b expression, as described herein.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding RNAs that modulate gene expression at the posttranscriptional level by interfering with RNA translation or stability and can dramatically impact tumor immune suppression and angiogenesis42,43. The Let7 family of miRNAs has been shown to control Il6 expression in tumor and inflammatory cells40,41.

It was found that miRNA Let7a expression inversely correlated with Il6 expression in murine and human macrophages (FIGS. 11A-11B). As such, it was determined whether loss of CD11b expression in macrophages affects Let7a expression. Let7a expression was ablated in Itgam−/− and Itgam siRNA transduced macrophages and in the presence of neutralizing CD11b antibodies (FIGS. 3D and 11C) in a manner that was independent of Lin28, an RNA binding protein that cleaves and inactivates Let7, as Lin28 levels were not affected by CD11b expression or activation (FIGS. 11B, 11D and 11E). CD11b ligation by ICAM-1 promoted time-dependent Let7a expression, while inhibiting Il6 expression; conversely, suppression of adhesion inhibited Let7a expression and promoted Il6 expression in both murine and human macrophages (FIGS. 3E and 3F). Importantly, ectopic expression of Let7a miRNA (pre-miRNA) inhibited immune suppressive gene expression and stimulated pro-inflammatory gene expression in Itgam−/− macrophages, while anti-miRNA Let7a stimulated immune suppressive gene expression and inhibited immune stimulatory gene expression in WT macrophages (FIG. 3G). Similar to CD11b ablation (FIG. 1A), anti-miRNA Let7a stimulated Pdgfb expression, but had no effect on Vegfa expression (FIG. 3H). Together, these results indicate that CD11b activation promotes miRNA Let7a expression, which in turn inhibits immune suppressive macrophage gene expression.

c-Myc, a transcription factor that regulates basal and immune suppressive macrophage metabolism, binds to the Let7 promoter and suppresses Let7 transcription; interestingly, Let7 can also suppress c-Myc expression44,45. It was found that c-Myc gene was upregulated in Itgam−/− macrophages compared with WT macrophages (FIG. 3I). c-Myc protein expression and serine 62 phosphorylation, which stabilizes the transcription factor46, were also upregulated in Itgam−/− macrophages compared with WT macrophages (FIG. 3J). It was then asked whether inhibition of cMyc function could promote Let7 expression and thereby alter macrophage polarization. Importantly, Let7a, Let7d, and Let7f expression was reduced in Itgam−/− macrophages; however, pharmacological inhibition of c-Myc restored Let7 expression in Itgam−/− macrophages and reversed the increased immune suppressive gene expression exhibited by Itgam−/− macrophages (FIGS. 3K and 3L). Together, these data indicate that integrin CD11b functions to suppress Myc expression and immune suppressive macrophage polarization in a Let7 dependent manner.

Because Let7a inhibits macrophage-mediated Pdgfb expression, the effect of Let7a expression on neovascularization was investigated in vitro and in vivo. Endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells attached to microcarrier beads were cultured in fibrin gels that contained either WT or Itgam−/− macrophages that were transduced with control miRNA, pre-miRNA Let7a, anti-miRNA Let7a or Pdgf-bb siRNA. Itgam−/− macrophages stimulated sprout elongation that was inhibited by transduction of macrophages with Let7a miRNA or Pdgfb siRNA (FIGS. 4A, 4B and 11F). In contrast, expression of anti-miRNA Let7a in WT but not Itgam−/− macrophages stimulated sprout elongation (FIGS. 4A, 4B and 11F). Additionally, macrophages transduced with anti-miR Let7a stimulated the formation of mature, pericyte-coated blood vessels in bFGF-saturated Matrigel in vivo (FIG. 4C). Together, these studies show that CD11b controls neovascularization through the regulation of Let7a and subsequent PDGF-BB expression.

To test the role of Let7a in the regulation of tumor immune suppression and neovascularization, anti-miR Let7a was delivered to tumors in targeted nanoparticles in vivo (FIG. 4D). It was found that integrin αvβ3-targeted particles were specifically taken up by circulating myeloid cells in normal and tumor bearing animals (FIGS. 12A-12H). Delivery of anti-miRNA Let7a stimulated LLC tumor growth, comparable to that observed in Itgam−/− mice (FIG. 4D). Although Let7a is expressed in immune and non-immune cells in tumors, it was found that delivery of anti-miR Let7a only inhibited Let7a expression in circulating monocytes and tumor associated macrophages but not in other tumor associated cells (FIG. 4E). Importantly, anti-miRNA Let7a stimulated immune suppressive and pro-angiogenic gene expression and inhibited pro-inflammatory gene expression in tumors compared with controls (FIGS. 4F and 13A). Anti-miRNA Let7a also stimulated blood vessel normalization in transfected tumors, as vessels were longer, less branched, heavily coated with pericytes and less leaky than vessel from control transfected tumors (FIGS. 4G and 4H). Anti-Let7a also suppressed CD8+ T cell recruitment to tumors and enhanced CD4+ T cell recruitment to tumors (FIG. 4I). Together, these results indicate that CD11b restrains immune suppression and vascular maturation through its regulation of miRNA Let7a.

Thus, the methods of treating cancer may include administering to the subject in need thereof, a therapeutically effective amount of miRNA Let7a. It should be understood that such methods may also include administering a therapeutically effective amount of an agonist of CD11b expression in combination with a therapeutically effective amount of miRNA Let7a. Such compounded treatment regimens may include administering the agonist of CD11b expression first, followed by the therapeutically effective amount of miRNA Let7a, or vice versa. In various embodiments, both the agonist of CD11b expression and the miRNA Let7a are administered simultaneously.

Advances in basic, translational, and clinical research have revealed the power of cancer immunotherapy. Immune checkpoint inhibitors such as anti-programmed death (PD)-1, anti-PD ligand l(PD-L1), anti-cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen (CTLA)4 antibodies, which suppress the functions of T cell inhibitory receptors (immune checkpoints), and chimeric antigen T cell receptor (CAR-T) therapies are therapeutic strategies that can increase the content of activated, tumor-specific cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) in various tumors. Currently, approved checkpoint inhibitors for cancer therapy include pembrolizumab, nivolumab, and cemiplimab (anti-PD-1); atezolizumab, avelumab, and durvalumab (anti-PD-L1); and ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4). However, many cancer patients have exhibited resistance to immunotherapies, with ongoing research indicating that resistance to checkpoint inhibitors or adoptive T cell immunotherapies can be mediated by abundant tumor-associated myeloid cell infiltrates, including macrophages, monocytes, and granulocytes.

Prior studies have shown that increased vascular normalization in tumors can improve tumor perfusion and promote responsiveness to therapy23-36. To determine whether the vascular normalization induced by anti-miRNA Let7a might enhance the efficacy of chemotherapy by increasing tumor perfusion, mice bearing LLC tumors were treated with targeted delivery of anti-miRNA Let7a or control miRNA in combination with chemotherapy (gemcitabine) (FIG. 4J).

Chemically, gemcitabine is a nucleoside analog in which the hydrogen atoms on the 2′ carbon of deoxycytidine are replaced by fluorine atoms. As with analogues of pyrimidines, the triphosphate analogue of gemcitabine replaces one of the building blocks of nucleic acids, in this case cytidine, during DNA replication. The process has been shown to arrest tumor growth, as only one additional nucleoside can be attached to the “faulty” nucleoside, resulting in apoptosis.

Whereas anti-miRNA Let7a promoted LLC tumor growth, anti-miRNA Let7a combined with gemcitabine substantially reduced tumor growth, consistent with the notion that Let7a inhibition increases accessibility of the tumor to chemotherapy (FIG. 4K). In accordance with these results, it was found that gemcitabine treatment of Itgam−/− mice suppressed tumor growth more profoundly than gemcitabine treatment of WT mice (FIG. 13B). As Itgam−/− exhibited greater perfusion (less vascular leak) than WT mice (FIG. 13C), these studies indicate that CD11b, through its effects on miRNA Let7a, plays a critical role in regulating tumor immune and vascular responses.

The results provided herein suggested that targeted pharmacologic activation of CD11b in vivo can repolarize tumor associated macrophages, with subsequent inhibition of tumor immune suppression and tumor growth. The effects of a small molecule agonist of CD11b, leukadherin 1 (LA1)47,48 (FIG. 5A) were then investigated on macrophage polarization and tumor growth. LA1 stimulated myeloid cell adhesion to ICAM-1 coated substrates in a manner that is inhibited by anti-CD11b-neutralizing antibodies (FIG. 5B). LA1 stimulated macrophage immune response gene expression, illustrated by increases in expression of Il1b, Tnfa, Il12, Nos2 and Ifng mRNAs (FIG. 14A). As LA1 stimulated Let7a expression and inhibited Pdgfb and Il6 expression (FIG. 5C), these results suggest that LA1 might stimulate pro-inflammatory immune responses that could inhibit tumor growth in vivo.

Thus, in another aspect, the methods of treating cancer in a subject may also include administering a therapeutically effective amount of (i) one or more of an agonist of CD11b activity or expression, such as LA1 and anti-miRNA Let7a, in combination with (ii) one or more chemotherapeutic agents, such as checkpoint inhibitors for cancer therapy.

To assess the effects of LA1 on tumor associated macrophages in vivo, tumor associated macrophages were isolated10, treated with LA1 prior and co-implanted with LLC tumor cells. LA1-treated macrophages completely inhibited tumor growth (FIGS. 5D and 5E) even though LA1 had no direct effect on LLC or macrophage viability (FIGS. 5E and 5F). Although LA1 had no effect on CL66-Luc breast tumor cell growth in vitro (FIG. 14B), LA1 potently reduced tumor growth in syngeneic, orthotopically implanted CL66-Luc breast tumors more effectively than taxol (FIG. 5G). LA1 also synergized with irradiation to suppress CL66-Luc breast tumor growth (FIG. 5H) and suppressed the growth of orthotopic, human MDA-MB-231 mammary xenograft tumors (FIG. 5I). It was observed that LA1 inhibited murine LLC lung tumor growth in WT but not in Itgam−/− mice, indicating that LA1 acts through integrin CD11b to suppress the growth of tumors (FIGS. 5J and 5K).

As LA1 treatment increased the presence of MHCII+ macrophages, typically considered immune suppressive, in LLC and CL66-Luc tumors (FIGS. 14C-14D), these studies suggest that LA1 repolarizes tumor associated macrophages. It was found that LA1 inhibited expression of S100A8 and MMP9 in CD11b+ cells in LLC tumors and also inhibited expression of Arginasel, S100A8 and MMP9 in CL66-Luc tumors (FIGS. 14E-14F). As these proteins are markers of pro-tumoral macrophages, together these studies indicate that LA1 likely inhibits tumor growth by repolarizing tumor associated macrophages. Indeed, LA1 treatment increased the presence of CD8+ T cells in both LLC and CL66-Luc tumors (FIGS. 15A-15C). It was also observed that LA1 treatment altered neovascularization in tumors by decreasing the numbers of SMA+ blood vessels (FIG. 5L). By enhancing the pro-inflammatory immune profile of tumors and inhibiting vascular normalization in tumors, the small molecule CD11b agonist LA1 significantly altered macrophage polarization, increased CD8+ T cell recruitment to tumors and inhibited tumor progression in mouse models of murine and human cancer.

As described above, macrophage integrin CD11b was identified as a critical regulator of pro-inflammatory immune responses that prevent cancer progression. These studies demonstrate that CD11b ligation/activation inhibits the immune suppressive transcriptional signature of tumor-derived macrophages, stimulates accumulation of CD8+ T cells in tumors and suppresses tumor growth. Loss of CD11b expression or function promotes immune suppressive gene expression in macrophages in vitro and TAMs in vivo, increases FoxP3+ CD4+ T cells and decreases CD8+ T cell recruitment to tumors and increases tumor growth. In contrast, activation of CD11b with the small molecule agonist LA1 stimulates macrophage pro-inflammatory transcription and anti-tumor immunity to inhibit tumor progression in animal models of cancer.

Using Itgam−/− mice, as well as knockdown and neutralizing antibody approaches, the data presented herein demonstrates that integrin CD11b is not required for myeloid cell trafficking during tumor growth, although other studies have shown CD11b regulates myeloid cell recruitment under conditions of acute inflammation.17,18 These differences may arise from the unique microenvironmental cues and alterations in blood vessel biology observed in tumors versus inflamed tissue. Recent studies have shown that signaling pathways regulated by TLRs, CSF1R, PI3Kγ and BTK control macrophage polarization. Here, CD11b has been shown to promote miRNA Let7a and inhibit Myc expression to control macrophage polarization and tumor immune responses (FIG. 5M). Taken together, these studies demonstrate that agonists of macrophage integrin CD11b could provide benefit in the treatment of cancer.

Improved vascular perfusion in CD11b−/− animals was observed. Compared to non-pathological tissue, tumors display disorganized, and immature blood vessel structures. Tumor blood vessels often consist only of a single fenestrated endothelial layer and lack the additional coverage of mesenchymal cells, such as pericytes and smooth muscle cells, which provide blood vessels with a stable and more mature structure that promotes tumor perfusion and better access to chemotherapy23-36. In these studies, tumor blood vessels from CD11b−/− mice displayed increased pericyte coverage and increased vascular flow compared to WT. Indeed, deletion of CD11b or Let7a suppression increased the PDGF-BB/VEGF-A ratio, resulting in tumors with normalized vessels that stimulate tumor growth but are susceptible to cancer chemotherapy.

Integrin CD11b−/− macrophages expressed increased levels of IL-6 that induced the expression of STAT3-dependent immunosuppressive cytokines. Decreased integrin CD11b expression or activation negatively regulated the expression of miRNA Let-7a in macrophages, thereby upregulating intracellular Il6 levels in macrophages. Reduced Let-7a expression is associated with malignant transformation of cancer cells and poor prognosis in cancer40,41. It was found that loss of CD11b down-regulates Let7a, leading to elevated Il6 levels and increased activation of STAT3, which were critical for the expression of M2-related cytokines. In contrast, recent studies showed that miRNA Let 7d-5p and DICER promote the M2 phenotype42. Together, these studies demonstrate the critical roles that miRNA species play in the polarization of macrophages and cancer growth.

As demonstrated herein, loss of Let7 expression in CD11b−/− macrophages induces Myc expression; Myc then drives immune suppressive transcription and inhibition of immune stimulatory transcription. Although both Myc and NFκB are transiently activated in WT IFNγ/LPS stimulated macrophages, NFκB activation is inhibited and Myc is activated in IFNγ/LPS stimulated Itgam−/− macrophages, leading to blockade of immune stimulatory transcription. These results suggest that Myc may inactivate NFκB in macrophages, thereby contributing to immune suppression and enhanced tumor growth.

As discussed above, it was found that LA1, a potent activator of integrin CD11b/CD18 in vitro and in vivo42, could significantly alter macrophage polarization, increase CD8+ T cell recruitment to tumors, inhibit tumor progression and prolong survival in mouse models of cancer. To determine the role of macrophage CD11 b activation in tumor growth, adoptive transfer of LA1 treated macrophages was performed; LA1 treated macrophages directly and robustly inhibited tumor growth. LA1 effects were lost in Itgam−/− mice, indicating that the effects of LA1 on tumor growth depend on intact CD11b. These results indicate that LA1 acts on myeloid cells to effect changes in macrophage polarization, vasculogenesis and T cell recruitment. As LA1 has also been shown to inhibit bone marrow derived cell trafficking to tissues by promoting stable adhesion to endothelium. It is possible that LA1 may inhibit immune suppressive myeloid cell trafficking to tumors49. By slowing tumor progression, LA1 may also be useful to suppress the spread of cancer through metastasis.

LA1 was shown to stimulate a pro-inflammatory phenotype in macrophages in vitro and in vitro. To address the direct impact of LA1 treated TAMs on tumor growth, we performed adoptive transfer of LA1 treated TAMs with tumor cells. It was found that LA1 treatment of TAMs robustly and rapidly abolished tumor growth. In this model, it was previously shown that adoptive transfer of immune suppressive macrophages (IL-4 stimulated) or TAMs promotes tumor growth, while adoptive transfer of immune stimulatory macrophages (IFNγ/LPS stimulated) and repolarized TAMs) recruited CD8+ T cells to tumors and rapidly abolished tumor growth10. It was further shown that this tumor suppression by adoptively transferred macrophages required IL-12, a pro-inflammatory factor that recruits and stimulates CD8+ T cell proliferation10. Thus, this evidence supports that LA1 repolarizes TAMs, leading to recruitment and activation of CD8+ T cells. As systemic delivery of LA1 also recruits CD8+ T cells and repolarizes TAMs in tumor models, these studies indicate that CD11b agonism by LA1 repolarizes macrophages and stimulates an adaptive immune response.

The role of T cell depletion was tested in the response to LA1 treatment by implanting MDA-MB-231 breast tumor cells in SCID mice, which lack T cells. By comparison, CL66 Luc breast tumor cells were implanted in syngeneic, immune competent mice. Interestingly, LA1 inhibited MDA-MB-231 tumor growth to 50% of that of control treated animals. In contrast, LA1 inhibited CL66 Luc tumor growth to 25% of that of control tumors. LA1 also repolarized macrophages by stimulating MHCII expression and reducing CD206, Arg1, MMP9 and S100A8 expression in TAMs and promoted CD8+ T cell recruitment in this model. Together, these results indicate that LA1 acts on myeloid cells to change tumor associated macrophage polarization leading to increased T cell recruitment, and T cell dependent tumor suppression.

However, the partial effect of LA1 on MDA-MB-231 tumors indicates that LA1 (and hence CD11b) also affects T cell independent processes to suppress tumor growth. It was shown that LA1 reduced inhibiting vascular normalization (as detected by pericyte coated blood vessel density) in all tumor models. These studies indicate that CD11b controls innate immune cell polarization and that these cells regulate vascular as well as adaptive immune responses in the tumor microenvironment. Together, these results indicate that CD11 activation controls tumor macrophage polarization, vasculogenesis and T cell recruitment.

In yet another aspect, the invention provides a method of identifying cancer cells amenable to treatment with a chemotherapeutic agent. The method includes detecting expression levels of CD11b or Let7a, alone or in combination with one or more of Il1b, Tnfa, Il12, Nos2 and Ifng in a sample comprising cancer cells from the subject, contacting the sample with an agonist of CD11b or Let7a activity or expression, and detecting increased levels of CD11b or Let7a, thereby identifying the cancer cells as being amenable to treatment with a chemotherapeutic agent. The method may further include detecting increases in expression of Il1b, Tnfa, Il12, Nos2 and Ifng to further support the finding that the cancer cells as being amenable to treatment with a chemotherapeutic agent. In various embodiments, the method may further include detecting expression levels of one or more of Pdgfb and Il6 prior to the contacting, where inhibited Pdgfb and Il6 expression after the contacting is indicative of the cancer cells are amenable to treatment with a chemotherapeutic agent.

In yet another aspect, the invention provides a method of rendering a cancer cell susceptible to a cancer therapeutic treatment regimen. The method includes contacting the cancer cell with an agonist of CD11b or Let7a activity or expression, thereby rendering the cancer cell susceptible to the cancer therapeutic treatment regimen.

In another aspect, the invention provides a composition comprising the agonist of CD11b or Let7a activity or expression of the invention, which can be prepared for administration to a subject by mixing the agonist with physiologically acceptable carriers or excipients. Such carriers will be nontoxic to recipients at the dosages and concentrations employed. Ordinarily, the preparation of such compositions entails combining the particular antibody with saline, buffers, antioxidants such as ascorbic acid, low molecular weight (less than about 10 residues) polypeptides, proteins, amino acids, carbohydrates including glucose or dextrans, or chelating agents such as EDTA, glutathione and other stabilizers and excipients. Such compositions can be in suspension, emulsion or lyophilized form and are formulated under conditions such that they are suitably prepared and approved for use in the desired application.

A physiologically acceptable carrier or excipient can be any material that, when combined with the agonist of CD11b or Let7a activity or expression of the invention, allows the ingredient to retain biological activity and does not undesirably disrupt a reaction with the subject's immune system. Examples include, but are not limited to, any of the standard physiologically acceptable carriers such as a phosphate buffered saline solution, water, emulsions such as oil/water emulsion, and various types of wetting agents. Preferred diluents for aerosol or parenteral administration are phosphate buffered saline or normal (0.9%) saline. Compositions comprising such carriers are formulated by well-known conventional methods (see, for example, Remington's Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chapter 43, 14th Ed., Mack Publishing Co., Easton Pa. 18042, USA).

For administration to a subject, a peptide, or an encoding polynucleotide, generally is formulated as a composition. Accordingly, the present invention provides a composition, which generally contains, in addition to the peptide or polynucleotide of the invention, a carrier into which the peptide or polynucleotide can be conveniently formulated for administration. For example, the carrier can be an aqueous solution such as physiologically buffered saline or other solvent or vehicle such as a glycol, glycerol, an oil such as olive oil or an injectable organic ester. A carrier also can include a physiologically acceptable compound that acts, for example, to stabilize the peptide or encoding polynucleotide or to increase its absorption. Physiologically acceptable compounds include, for example, carbohydrates, such as glucose, sucrose or dextrans, antioxidants, such as ascorbic acid or glutathione, chelating agents, low molecular weight proteins or other stabilizers or excipients. Similarly, a cell that has been treated in culture for purposes of the practicing the methods of the invention also can be formulated in a composition when the cells are to be administered to a subject.

In another aspect, the invention provides a method of screening for a therapeutic/test/candidate agent for treating cancer or for promoting tumor perfusion and better access to chemotherapy. The method includes administering a test agent to the transgenic non-human mammal described herein and evaluating the effect of the test agent on at least one of expression levels of CD11b or Let7a, alone, or in combination with one or more of Il1b, Tnfa, Il12, Nos2 and Ifng in at least one disease-relevant tissue of the transgenic non-human mammal, wherein at least one of: an increase in the amount of CD11b expression or an increase in the amount of Let7a expression, alone, or in combination with increases in expression of Il1b, Tnfa, Il12, Nos2 and Ifng in at least one disease-relevant tissue relative to a similar transgenic non-human mammal that does not receive the test agent indicates the test agent is therapeutic for the cancer and/or promotes tumor perfusion and better access to chemotherapy.

A “test agent” or “candidate agent” refers to an agent that is to be screened in one or more of the assays described herein. The agent can be virtually any chemical compound. It can exist as a single isolated compound or can be a member of a chemical (e.g., combinatorial) library. In one embodiment, the test agent is a small organic molecule. The term small organic molecules refers to molecules of a size comparable to those organic molecules generally used in pharmaceuticals.

Conventionally, new chemical entities with useful properties are generated by identifying a chemical compound (called a “lead compound”) with some desirable property or activity, creating variants of the lead compound, and evaluating the property and activity of those variant compounds.

The total amount of a compound or composition to be administered in practicing a method of the invention can be administered to a subject as a single dose, either as a bolus or by infusion over a relatively short period of time, or can be administered using a fractionated treatment protocol, in which multiple doses are administered over a prolonged period of time. One skilled in the art would know that the amount of the plasma expander used to treat blood loss in a subject depends on many factors including the age and general health of the subject as well as the route of administration and the number of treatments to be administered. In view of these factors, the skilled artisan would adjust the particular dose as necessary. In general, the formulation of the pharmaceutical composition and the routes and frequency of administration are determined, initially, using Phase I and Phase II clinical trials.

The following examples are intended to illustrate but not limit the invention.

### EXAMPLE 1

**Materials and Methods**

Cell lines—C57BL/6 LLC, B16 melanoma, CL66 breast and MDA-MB-231 breast tumor cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Cells were cultured in antibiotic- and fungizide-free DMEM or RPMI media containing 10% serum and tested negative for mycoplasma using the Mycoplasma Plus PCR primer set from Stratagene (La Jolla, Calif.). All cell lines were authenticated by tumor cell and tumor histology and by RNA or DNA sequencing.

Mice—C57BL/6 and CD11b deficient (Itgam−/−) mice in the C57BL/6 background were from Jackson Laboratories. For the spontaneous breast cancer model, male PyMT+ mice on a C57BL/6 background were crossed with wild type (WT) or Itgam−/− C57BL/6 at the University of California, San Diego to generate WT and Itgam−/− P+ females. Wild type and CD11b−/− female mice heterozygous for the PyMT transgene were compared to each other. All PyMT+ females exhibit adenomas/early carcinomas by 16 weeks of age and late carcinomas by 25 weeks of age.

Generation of the ITGAM I332G knock-in mouse was accomplished by replacing exon 9 of the ITGAM gene using a targeting construct in which the Ile332 codon was substituted with Gly using a site-directed mutagenesis kit. The mutation led to the loss of the Exon-9 Bgl II restriction site. C57BL/6 ES cells with the heterozygous ITGAM I332G mutant allele were generated. G418-resistant clones were characterized by PCR, sequencing and southern blot analysis. The heterozygous mutant mice were generated using the blastocyst injection method. Mice heterozygous for the ITGAM I332G mutation were normal, fertile and phenotypically indistinguishable from wild-type (WT) littermates. The heterozygous mice were bred with ROSA26::FLPe knockin (JAX Stock No: 003946) mice to remove the selection cassette. The N2 offspring were backcrossed with C57BL/6N for six generations. The C57BL/6N N6 mice were crossed to obtain mice homozygous for the ITGAM I332G mutation that were also indistinguishable from wild-type (WT) littermates. Female nude and Balb/cJ mice at 6-8 weeks of age were from Jackson Laboratories and housed under pathogen-free conditions in the animal facility at Rush University Medical Center.

Tumor Studies—Subcutaneous tumor studies: 5×105 LLC or B16 cells were injected subcutaneously into syngeneic (C57BL/6) 6- to 8-week old WT or Itgam−/− mice (n=18). Tumors were excised at 7, 14 or 21 days, cryopreserved in OCT, lysed for RNA purification or collagenase-digested for flow cytometric analysis of CD11b+, F4/80+ and G1+ expression. Tumor volumes were calculated using the equation (l2×w)/2. CL66-luc cells (0.5×106 cells) were suspended in 50 μL of basement membrane extract Matrigel (BD Pharmingen) in PBS (1:1) and inoculated orthotopically in the fourth mammary fat pad of female Balb/cJ mice. Tumor dimensions were measured every 2 days, and tumor volume was calculated using the equation: V (mm3)=π/6 (length)*(width), where length is the longest diameter of the tumor and width is the shorter diameter.

Mice were divided into four cohorts: vehicle control treated, LA1 only treated, Taxol only treated, LA1 and Taxol treated. LA1 (2 mg/kg) was dissolved in 2% DMSO and 1% Tween-20 in saline and Taxol (2.5 mg/kg) was dissolved in a 1:1:6 ratio of Cremophor EL:Ethanol:Saline. LA1 was administered by intraperitoneal injection (i.p.) daily, while Taxol was administered every other day by i.p. injection until end-point. LA1+ Taxol treated mice received LA1 i.p. in the morning followed by Taxol i.p. within 4 hours. Tumor burden was evaluated every other day by caliper measurements. Prior to tissue collection, mice were anesthetized by ketamine/xylazine and the lungs were perfused with PBS followed by 10% formalin and harvested for fixation. Mammary tumor tissue was harvested and divided for fixation (10% formalin or OCT), snap frozen, or made into single-cell suspensions and analyzed by flow cytometric analysis. For survival studies, Balb/c mice bearing CL66-derived tumors were treated for 6 weeks after the first treatment and monitored thereafter. End point was considered when the tumor reached 2 mm in diameter (n=10-15).

Alternatively, 5 million MDA-MB 231 human breast cancer cells were injected orthotopically in the 4th mammary fat pad of 6-week old female nude mice. The tumors were allowed to establish for 35 days (at least 0.5 cm in diameter) and the tumor bearing mice were divided into three treatment groups including, vehicle, LA1 only (i.p.; 2.0 mg/kg; daily) and Taxol only (i.p.; 2.5 mg/kg every other day). Treatment was initiated on day 35 and continued until the end-point at day 58 post-tumor when all the mice were sacrificed and tumor tissue was harvested for histological analysis. Palpable tumors were measured using digital calipers 3 times weekly during the entire experiment to develop tumor growth curves.

LA1 treatment of LLC: 7.5×105 LLC cells were injected subcutaneously (s.c.) into the right flank of syngeneic 6- to 8-week old WT or CD11b−/− mice. At 5-8 days post tumor inoculation, tumor-bearing mice were divided into the following treatment groups: Vehicle (6% DMSO, 1% Tween-20 in saline), LA1 (6 mg/kg dissolved in vehicle). Vehicle and LA1 was administered by intraperitoneal injection (i.p.) daily. Tumor burden was evaluated 2-3 times a week by caliper measurements and tumor volumes were calculated using the equation (l2×w)/2. Tumors were harvested at 3 weeks post-tumor inoculation, formalin fixed, cryopreserved in OCT, or collagenase-digested for flow cytometric analysis.

PyMT Studies: The growth of spontaneous mammary tumors in PyMT+ (n=10) and Itgam−/−; PyMT+ (n=14) animals in the C57B16 background was evaluated over the course of 0-25 weeks. All PyMT+ females exhibited adenomas/early carcinomas by 16 weeks of age and late carcinomas by 25 weeks of age. Total tumor burden at endpoint was determined by subtracting the total mammary gland mass in PyMT− animals from the total mammary gland mass in PyMT+ animals.

ITGAM I332G knock-in mouse tumor studies: 7.5×105 LLC cells were injected subcutaneously (s.c.) into the right flank of syngeneic 6- to 8-week old WT or CD11b KI mice. Palpable tumors were established at 5-8 days post-tumor inoculation. Tumor burden was evaluated 2-3 times a week by caliper measurements and tumor volumes were calculated using the equation v=(l2×w)/2. Tumors and spleens were harvested at 4 weeks post-tumor inoculation, weighed, formalin fixed or cryopreserved in OCT for histological analysis.

Immunohistochemistry—Tumor samples were collected and cryopreserved in O.C.T. Sections (5 μm) were fixed in 100% cold acetone, blocked with 8% normal goat serum for 2 hours, and incubated with primary antibodies at 1-5 μm/ml for 2 hours at room temperature. Sections were washed 3 times with PBS and incubated with fluorescent secondary antibodies. Primary antibodies where: F4/80 (BM8, eBioscience), CD4 (H129.19, BD Bioscience), CD8 (53-6.7, BD Bioscience), CD31 (MEC13.1, BD Bioscience), desmin (RB0914-P1, LabVision, Thermo Scientific), and anti-smooth muscle actin (SMA) (1A4, Sigma-Aldrich). Slides were counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) to identify nuclei. Immunofluorescence images were collected on a Nikon microscope (Eclipse TE2000-U) and analyzed using Metamorph image capture and analysis software (Version 6.3r5, Molecular Devices). Pixels/field or cell number/field were quantified in five 100× fields from 5 biological replicates. For LA1 studies, immunohistochemical staining was quantified by counting marker positive cells in 3 different areas analyzed at 40× using a light microscope for each tumor tissue (n=4-6). Tissues that were stained with fluorochrome conjugated secondary antibodies were counter stained with DAPI and analyzed using the Zeiss 700 LSM confocal microscope and Zen software (Carl Zeiss Group, Hartford, Conn.).

Alternatively, immunostaining was performed on formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissues. Deparaffinized tissue sections (5 μm) were either stained with hemotoxylin-eosin or were subjected to antigen retrieval by steam heating in an acidic pH solution (Citrate-based, Vector Laboratories) prior to immune staining for α-SMA (clone 1A4, Fisher Scientific), MMP9 (polyclonal rabbit, Abcam), S100A8 (goat polyclonal (M-19), Santa Cruz), CD31 (clone RM0032-1D12, Abcam), or ARG1 (sc-18351, Santa Cruz) at 4° C. overnight. Sections were washed and incubated with the appropriate fluorochrome conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Grand Island, N.Y.) or biotinylated secondary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer for 1 hr. at RT. For sections that were stained with biotinylated secondary antibodies, signal development was accomplished by using the DAB Substrate Kit (Vector Laboratories).

Quantification of Murine Peripheral Blood Cells—To quantify myeloid cells in murine peripheral blood, blood was collected from naïve or tumor bearing mice by retro-orbital bleeding into heparin-coated Vacutainer tubes (BD Bioscience), incubated in red blood cell lysis buffer. Cells were washed twice in PBS and stained for flow cytometric sorting.

Cytotoxicity Assay—Taxol and LA1 cytotoxicity towards the CL66-luc tumor cell was determined by measuring luciferase activity in the tumor cells after exposure to LA1 or Taxol. CL66-luc cells (1,000 cells/well) were seeded into 96-well plates overnight at 37° C. prior to treatment with titrating concentrations of LA1 or Taxol dissolved in 1% DMSO in IDMEM for 24, 48 and 72 hrs. Cells treated with vehicle (1% DMSO in IDMEM) were a negative control. Media was aspirated from the cultured cells and 100 μL of a 150 μg/mL working solution of D-Luciferin in pre-warmed DMEM (10% FBS) was added to each well. The plates were incubated at 37° C. for 5 mins prior to reading luminescence using the EnSpire Plate Reader (PerkinElmer).

Isolation of Single Cells from Murine Tumors—Tumors were isolated, minced in a petri dish on ice and then enzymatically dissociated in Hanks Balanced Salt Solution containing 0.5 mg/ml Collagenase IV (Sigma), 0.1 mg/ml Hyaluronidase V (Sigma), and 0.005 MU/ml DNAse I (Sigma) at 37° C. for 5-30 min. The duration of enzymatic treatment was optimized for greatest yield of live CD11b+ cells per tumor type. Cell suspensions were filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer. Red blood cells were solubilized with red cell lysis buffer (Pharm Lyse, BD Biosciences, San Jose, Calif.), and the resulting suspension was filtered through a cell strainer to produce a single cell suspension. Cells were washed one time with PBS prior to use in flow cytometry analysis or sorting.

Flow Cytometry Staining and Analysis—Single cell suspensions (106 cells in 100 μL total volume) were incubated with Aqua Live Dead fixable stain (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, Calif.), FcR-blocking reagent (BD Biosciences, San Jose, Calif.) and fluorescently labeled antibodies and incubated at 4° C. for 1 h. Primary antibodies were: BV605-F4/80 (clone BM8, Biolegend #123133, 1.25 μg/ml), Alexa 700-CD45 (clone 30-F11, eBioscience #56-0451, ×0.6 μg/ml), CD11b-APC (clone M1/70, eBioscience #17-0012, 0.3 μg/ml), FITC-Gr1 (clone RB6-8C5, eBioscience #11-5931, 3 μg/ml), eF780-CD3 (clone 145-2C11, eBioscience #47-0031, 5 μg/ml), PE-Dazzle-CD4 (clone RM4-5, Biolegend #100565, 0.4 μg/ml), and BV605-CD8 (clone 53-6.7, Biolegend #100743, 1.75 μg/ml). Multicolor FACS Analysis was performed on a BD Canto RUO 11 Color Analyzer. All data analysis was performed using the flow cytometry analysis program FloJo (Treestar).

Human Macrophage Differentiation and Culture—Human leukocytes concentrated by from apheresis were obtained from the San Diego Blood Bank. Cells were diluted in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), 0.5% BSA, 2 mM EDTA, incubated in red cell lysis buffer (155 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM NaHCO3 and 0.1 mM EDTA) and centrifuged over Histopaque 1077 to purify mononuclear cells. Approximately 109 cells were purified by gradient centrifugation from one apheresis sample. Purified mononuclear cells were cultured in RPMI+20% serum+50 ng/ml Human M-CSF (PeproTech). Non-adherent cells were removed after 2 hours by washing, and adherent cells were cultured for 6 days to differentiate macrophages fully.

Murine macrophage differentiation and culture—Bone marrow derived cells (BMDC) were aseptically harvested from 6-8 week-old female mice by flushing leg bones of euthanized mice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), 0.5% BSA, 2 mM EDTA, incubating in red cell lysis buffer (155 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM NaHCO3 and 0.1 mM EDTA) and centrifuging over Histopaque 1083 to purify the mononuclear cells. Approximately 5×107 BMDC were purified by gradient centrifugation from the femurs and tibias of a single mouse. Purified mononuclear cells were cultured in RPMI+20% serum+50 ng/ml M-CSF (PeproTech).

Macrophage Polarization—Bone marrow derived macrophages were polarized with either IFNγ (20 ng/ml, Peprotech) plus LPS (100 ng/ml, Sigma) or LPS alone for 24 h or IL-4 (20 ng/ml, Peprotech) for 24-48 h. In some cases, macrophages were incubated with inhibitors of Stat3 (STAT4 VIII) or cMyc (10058-F4, Selleck). In other experiments, BMM were treated with LLC tumor conditioned media (TCM) or 100 ng/ml TGF-β (PeproTech) for 6 h to analyze changes in protein and gene expression levels. TCM was obtained by culturing LLC in serum free media for 18 h followed by collecting the supernatant and sterile filtering prior to use. In some experiments TGF-β signaling was inhibited using SB5253324 added 30 min prior and during the 6 h stimulation. Total RNA was harvested from macrophages using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Secreted protein was measured in culture supernatants by ELISA assays.

Cell Adhesion Assay—PBMCs were extracted from human whole blood using the vendor instructions for Sep Mate-50 tubes (#15450, Stem Cell). Human CD14+ monocytes were isolated from the PBMCs using the vendor instructions for the EasySep™ Human Monocyte Isolation Kit (Catalog #19359, Stem Cell). Briefly, 384-well plates (#3700, Corning) were coated with recombinant human ICAM1 (750 ng/mL, #720-IC, R&D Systems), or M1/70 (10 ug/mL, #101202, Biolegend) or IB4 (10 μg/mL, #167-020, Ancell) overnight at 4° C. Wells were blocked with 1% milk dissolved in TBS for 1 hr at room temperature. All wells received Ca2+/Mg2+ ions (1 mM each physiological concentration, baseline control) except for the positive control wells that received 1 mM Mn2+ ions. A stock solution of LA1 agonist was prepared by dissolving the compound in DMSO at a concentration of 2 mM and final dilution of LA1 in wells was 20 μM. The final concentration of DMSO in all wells was 1%. 45,000 human monocytes were seeded in each well. Some wells received human monocytes cells that were pre-blocked with anti-human CD11b (M1/70) for 15 min at 4° C. The plates were incubated at 37° C. for 30 min followed by 30 min of inversion at room temperature to remove non-adherent cells. Cells were fixed, stained with DAPI and counted using the Opera High Content Screening System (Perkin Elmer). Assays were performed in six replicate wells.

Lentiviral Transduction of Bone Marrow Derived Macrophages—Self-inactivating pLenti vectors containing CD11b WT, CD11b I332G active and CD11b E336A inactive variants were obtained. Expression of CD11b in these vectors is driven by CMV promoter. HEK 293T cells were used as packaging cells to produce VSV-G pseudotyped lentiviral particles. Viral titer was assessed by qPCR for p24 viral RNA and was in the order of 1×108 IU/ml. 2×106 bone marrow derived mononuclear cells were plated per well in 6-well non-tissue culture treated plates in DMEM media supplemented with 20% FBS, 1% Pen Strep and 50 ng/ml M-CSF, in the presence of various lentivirus. On day 2 and day 4, fresh DMEM containing 20% FBS, 1% Pen Strep and 50 ng/ml M-CSF was added to the cells. On day 7, the cells were lifted from the plate using 5 mM EDTA in PBS and stained for flow cytometry using Aqua-live/dead, F4/80-APC and CD11b-PE antibodies or used in further studies.

Analysis of Gene Expression—Total RNA was isolated from cells using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). cDNA was prepared using 1 μg RNA with the qScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Quanta Biosciences) or the SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen). Sybr green-based qPCR was performed using primers to murine Gapdh (Mm_Gapdh_1_SG), Arg1 (Mm_Arg_1_SG QT00134288) Tgfb (Mm_Tgfb_1_SG Qiagen QT00145250), Il10, (Mm_Il10 1_SG Qiagen QT00106169), Il6 (Mm_Il6_1_SG Qiagen QT00098875), Nos2 (Mm_Nos2_1_SG Qiagen QT00100275), Il12b (Mm_Il12b_1_SG Qiagen QT00153643), Ifng (Mm_Ifng_1_SG Qiagen QT01038821), Il1b (Mm_Il1b_2_SG Qiagen QT01048355), Tnfa (Mm _Tnfa_1_SG Qiagen QT00104006), Vegfa (Mm_Vegfa_1_SG Qiagen QT00160769), Pdgfb (Mm_Pdgfb_1_SG Qiagen QT00266910) and human GAPDH (Hs_GAPDH_1_SG Qiagen QT00079247), ARG1 (Hs_Arginase_1_SG Qiagen QT00068446, Il6 (Hs_Il6_1_SG Qiagen QT00083720), NOS2 (Hs_NOS2_1_SG Qiagen QT00068740), IL12B (Hs_IL12B_1_SG Qiagen QT00000364), and PDGFB (Hs_PDGFB_1_SG Qiagen QT00001260) (Qiagen QuantiTect Primer Assay). mRNA levels were normalized to Gapdh or GAPDH (ΔCt=Ct gene of interest−Ct Gapdh) and reported as relative mRNA expression (ΔΔCt=2−(ΔCt sample−ΔCt control)) or fold change.

Immunoblotting—IL-4 and LPS macrophage cultures were solubilized in RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. 30 μg protein was electrophoresed on Biorad precast gradient gels and electroblotted onto PVDF membranes. Proteins were detected by incubation with 1:1000 dilutions of primary antibodies, washed and incubated with Goat anti-rabbit-HRP antibodies and detected after incubation with a chemiluminescent substrate. Primary antibodies directed against NFκBp65 (D14E12, #8242 Cell Signaling Technology, 1:1000), pSer536NFκBp65 (93H1, #3033 Cell Signaling Technology, 1:1000), cMyc (D3N8F, #13987 Cell Signaling Technology, 1:1000) or pSer62 cMyc (E1J4K, #13748 Cell Signaling Technology, 1:1000). Anti-actin (#A2103 Sigma-Aldrich, 1:1000).

ELISA Assays—Macrophage supernatants (100 μl) were used in ELISAs to detect CCLS, TNFα, and IL-6 (Ready Set Go ELISA, ThermoFisher). Protein expression was normalized to total volume (supernatants).

In vivo Macrophage Adoptive Transfer Experiments—F4/80+ cells were isolated from single cell suspensions of 700-800 mg LLC tumors from donor WT or Itgam−/− mice by FACS sorting. Primary bone marrow derived macrophages from WT or Itgam−/− mice were polarized and harvested into a single cell suspension. Alternatively, WT tumor derived macrophages were incubated with LA1 or saline. Purified macrophages were admixed 1:1 with LLC tumor cells and 5×105 total cells were injected subcutaneously into syngeneic host WT or Itgam−/− mice. Tumors were excised and weights were determined 14 days after inoculation.

Integrin CD11b Ligation Experiments—Differentiated bone marrow derived macrophages were cultured on 5 μg/ml VCAM-1 or ICAM-1 (R&D Systems) coated culture plates or maintained in suspension. To inhibit integrin CD11b ligation, macrophages were cultured on 5 μg/ml ICAM-1 in the presence of 25 μg/ml anti-CD11b antibody (M1/70, BD Bioscience) or in suspension culture on BSA coated culture plates. As a control, macrophages were cultured in the presence of IgG control antibody.

siRNA Mediated Knockdown—Differentiated macrophages were transfected (AMAXA, Mouse Macrophage Nucleofection Kit) using 100 nM of siRNA against Itgam (Mm_Itgam_01 or Mm_Itgam-5), Il6 (Mm_Il6_01 or Mm_Il6_03) or non-silencing siRNA (Ctrl_AllStars_1) from Qiagen. After transfection, cells were cultured for 36-48 h in DMEM containing 10% serum and 10 ng/ml M-CSF (PeproTech). Efficiency of Itgam knockdown of each oligo was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR QuantiTect Primer Assay) and flow cytometry.

MicroRNA and Anti-microRNA—Control miRNA, control anti-miRNA, Pre-miR-Let7a (PM10050) and Anti-miR-Let7a (AM10050) for in vitro studies were from Applied Biosystems. MicroRNA was delivered using siPORT (Ambion). To evaluate microRNA expression levels, total RNA was extracted with Trizol (Invitrogen), and RT-PCR was performed to detect let-7a (Mm_let-7a-1_2), let 7d (Mm_let-7d_1), or let7f (Mm_let7f-1_1) miScript Primer Assay. Data were normalized to the internal control small RNA snoRNA202 (Applied Biosystems). For in vivo studies, oligomers were purchased from Sigma:

Nanoparticle Preparation and Administration—The cyclic peptides, cRGDfK and cRADfK, were synthesized by using standard Fmoc solid-phase chemistry. Peptides were purified by reverse-phase HPLC, and mass was confirmed by mass spectroscopy. Peptides were conjugated to succinimidyl ester-(PEO)4-maleimide (Pierce). DSPE was reacted with iminothiolane (Sigma—Aldrich) to produce a free thiol. The DSPE containing the free thiol group was reacted with the cRGDfK-(PEO)4-maleimide or cRADfK-(PEO)4-maleimide to produce peptide-lipid conjugates.

Cholesterol/DOPE/DSPC/DSPE-(PEO)4-cRGDfK/DSPE-mPEG2000 (6:6:6:1:1 molar ratio) in chloroform was evaporated under argon gas and then hydrated in sterile 300 mM ammonium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) at a total lipid concentration of 3.32 mM for 1 h. Liposomes were vortexed for 2-3 min and sonicated in ULTRAsonik 28× for 2-3 min at room temperature to produce multilamellar vesicles (MLVs). MLVs were then sonicated with a Ti-probe (Branson 450 sonifier) for 1-2 min to produce small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs). Stepwise extrusion was performed with the final step being extrusion through a polycarbonate filter with 100-nm pore size (Whatman). Liposomes incorporating cyclic peptides were used to form lipid-RNA complexes. These complexes were formulated with a molar ratio of 4:1 calculated based on the N-[1-(2,3-dioleoyloxy)]-N,N,N-trimethylammonium propane (DOTAP) content of the liposomes. Nucleic acids (anti-miRNAs) and lipids were separately diluted in 100 μl RNase-free water. The RNA solution was added to the liposomes, mixed gently and the mixture was incubated at 25° C. for 5 min before injection into mice. Mice were treated with 5 μg of scrambled anti-miRNA or anti-miR-Let7a (Sigma) in RGD-nanoparticles intravenously every 3 d starting from day 7 until the end of the experiment.

Statistics—For studies evaluating mutations or drug treatments on tumor size, tumor volumes were computed and mice were randomly assigned to groups so that the mean volume+/−s.e.m. of each group was identical. A sample size of 10 mice/group provided 80% power to detect mean difference of 2.25 standard deviation (SD) between two groups (based on a two-sample t-test with 2-sided 5% significance level). Significance testing was performed by one-way Anova with Tukey's posthoc testing for multiple pairwise testing or by parametric or nonparametric Student's t test as appropriate. A two-sample t-test (two groups) and ANOVA (multiple groups) were used when data were normally distributed, a Wilcoxon rank sum test (two groups) when data were not and Fisher's exact test when appropriate. All mouse studies were randomized and blinded; assignment of mice to treatment groups, tumor measurement and tumor analysis was performed by coding mice with randomly assigned mouse number, with the key unknown to operators until experiments were completed. In tumor studies for which tumor size was the outcome, animals removed from the study due to health concerns were not included in endpoint analyses.

References: the following references are hereby incorporated by reference in their entireties.

1. Quail, et al. Microenvironmental regulation of tumor progression and metastasis. Nat. Med. 19, 1423-1437 (2013).

2. Schmid, et al. Myeloid cells in tumor inflammation. Vasc. Cell 4, 14 (2012).

3. Sica, A. & Mantovani, A. Macrophage plasticity and polarization: in vivo veritas. J. Clin. Invest. 122, 787-795 (2012).

4. Gabrilovich, D.I. Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells. Cancer Immunol Res. 5, 3-8 (2017).

5. Cotechini, et al. Myeloid Cells as Targets for Therapy in Solid Tumors. Cancer J 21, 343-350 (2015).

6. Ruffell, B. & Coussens, L. M. Macrophages and therapeutic resistance in cancer. Cancer Cell 27, 462-472 (2015).

7. Chittezhath, M. et al. Molecular profiling reveals a tumor-promoting phenotype of monocytes and macrophages in human cancer progression. Immunity 41, 815-829 (2014).

8. Gunderson, A. J. et al. Bruton tyrosine kinase-dependent immune cell crosstalk drives pancreas cancer. Cancer Discov. 6, 270-285 (2016).

9. Kaneda, M. M. et al. Macrophage PI3Kgamma drives pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma progression. Cancer Discov. 6, 870-885 (2016).

10. Kaneda, M. M. et al. PI3Kγ is a molecular switch that controls immune suppression. Nature 539, 437-442 (2016).

11. Pyonteck, S. M. et al. CSF-1R inhibition alters macrophage polarization and blocks glioma progression. Nat. Med. 19, 1264-1272 (2013).

12. Quail, D. F. et al. The tumor microenvironment underlies acquired resistance to CSF-1R inhibition in gliomas. Science 352, aad3018 (2016).

13. Schmid, M. C. et al. Combined blockade of integrin-alpha4beta1 plus cytokines SDF-1alpha or IL-1beta potently inhibits tumor inflammation and growth. Cancer Res. 71, 6965-6975 (2011).

14. Schmid, M. C. et al. PI3-kinase gamma promotes Rap1a-mediated activation of myeloid cell integrin alpha4beta1, leading to tumor inflammation and growth. PLoS One 8, e60226 (2013).

15. Schmid, M. C. et al. Receptor tyrosine kinases and TLR/IL1Rs unexpectedly activate myeloid cell PI3kγ, a single convergent point promoting tumor inflammation and progression. Cancer Cell 19, 715-727 (2011).

16. Coxon, A. et al. A novel role for the beta 2 integrin CD11b/CD18 in neutrophil apoptosis: a homeostatic mechanism in inflammation. Immunity 5, 653-666 (1996).

17. Jaeschke, H. et al. Functional inactivation of neutrophils with a Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18) monoclonal antibody protects against ischemia-reperfusion injury in rat liver. Hepatology 17, 915-923 (1993).

18. Rosetti, F. & Mayadas, T. N. The many faces of Mac-1 in autoimmune disease. Immunol. Rev. 269, 175-193 (2016).

19. Gilmore, T. D. Introduction to NF-kappaB: players, pathways, perspectives. Oncogene 25, 6680-6684 (2006).

20. Fan, S. T. & Edgington, T. S. Integrin regulation of leukocyte inflammatory functions. CD11b/CD18 enhancement of the tumor necrosis factor-alpha responses of monocytes. J. Immunol. 150, 2972-2980 (1993).

21. Ling, G. S. et al. Integrin CD11b positively regulates TLR4-induced signaling pathways in dendritic cells but not in macrophages. Nat. Commun. 5, 3039 (2014).

22. Xiong, J. P., Li, R., Essafi, M., Stehle, T. & Arnaout, M. A. An isoleucine-based allosteric switch controls affinity and shape shifting in integrin CD11 b Adomain. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 8762-38767 (2000).

23. Abramsson, A., Lindblom, P. & Betsholtz, C. Endothelial and nonendothelial sources of PDGF-B regulate pericyte recruitment and influence vascular pattern formation in tumors. J. Clin. Invest. 112, 1142-1151 (2003).

24. Carmeliet, P. & Jain, R. K. Principles and mechanisms of vessel normalization for cancer and other angiogenic diseases. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10, 417-427 (2011).

25. Greenberg, J. I. et al. A role for VEGF as a negative regulator of pericyte function and vessel maturation. Nature 456, 809-813 (2008).

26. Hellstrom, M. et al. Lack of pericytes leads to endothelial hyperplasia and abnormal vascular morphogenesis. J. Cell. Biol. 153, 543-553 (2001).

27. Lindahl, P., Johansson, B. R., Leveen, P. & Betsholtz, C. Pericyte loss and microaneurysm formation in PDGF-B-deficient mice. Science 277, 242-245 (1997).

28. Stockmann, C. et al. Deletion of vascular endothelial growth factor in myeloid cells accelerates tumorigenesis. Nature 456, 814-818 (2008).

29. Tong, R. T. et al. Vascular normalization by vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 blockade induces a pressure gradient across the vasculature and improves drug penetration in tumors. Cancer Res. 64, 3731-3736 (2004).

30. Zhou, K. et al. Apatinib, a selective VEGFR2 inhibitor, improves the delivery of chemotherapeutic agents to tumors by normalizing tumor vessels in LoVo colon cancer xenograft mice. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. doi.org/10.1038/s41401-018-0058-y (2018).

31. Pazos, M. C. et al. PDGFB as a vascular normalization agent in an ovarian cancer model treated with a gamma-secretase inhibitor. J. Cell. Physiol. 233, 5949-5961 (2018).

32. Chen, Q. et al. Tumor vasculature normalization by orally fed erlotinib to modulate the tumor microenvironment for enhanced cancer nanomedicine and immunotherapy. Biomaterials 148, 69-80 (2017).

33. Kim, S. J. et al. Tumor vessel normalization by the PI3K inhibitor HS-173 enhances drug delivery. Cancer Lett. 403, 339-353 (2017).

34. Ganss, R. Tumour vessel normalization and immune checkpoint blockade: a new synergism. Immunol. Cell Biol. 95, 497-498 (2017).

35. De Palma, M. & Jain, R. K. CD4(+) T cell activation and vascular normalization: two sides of the same coin? Immunity 46, 773-775 (2017).

36. Tian, L. et al. Mutual regulation of tumour vessel normalization and immunostimulatory reprogramming. Nature 544, 250-254 (2017).

37. Kiuchi, N. et al. STAT3 is required for the gp130-mediated full activation of the c-myc gene. J. Exp. Med. 189, 63-73 (1999).

38. Niu, G. et al. Constitutive Stat3 activity up-regulates VEGF expression and tumor angiogenesis. Oncogene 21, 2000-2008 (2002).

39. Yu, H., Kortylewski, M. & Pardoll, D. Crosstalk between cancer and immune cells: role of STAT3 in the tumour microenvironment. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7, 41-51 (2007).

40. Roush, S. & Slack, F. J. The let-7 family of microRNAs. Trends Cell Biol. 18, 505-516 (2008).

41. Iliopoulos, D. et al. An epigenetic switch involving NF-kappaB, Lin28, Let-7 MicroRNA, and IL6 links inflammation to cell transformation. Cell 139, 693-706 (2009).

42. Baer, C. et al. Suppression of microRNA activity amplifies IFN-γ-induced macrophage activation and promotes anti-tumour immunity. Nat. Cell Biol. 18, 790-802 (2016).

43. Anand, S. et al. MicroRNA-132-mediated loss of p120RasGAP activates the endothelium to facilitate pathological angiogenesis. Nat. Med. 16, 909-914 (2010).

44. Pello, O. M. et al. Role of c-MYC in alternative activation of human macrophages and tumor-associated macrophage biology. Blood 119, 411-421 (2012).

45. Sampson, V. B. et al. MicroRNA let-7a down-regulates MYC and reverts MYC-induced growth in Burkitt lymphoma cells. Cancer Res. 67, 9762-9770 (2007).

46. Sears, R. C. The life cycle of C-myc: from synthesis to degradation. Cell Cycle 3, 1133-1137 (2004).

47. Faridi, M. H. et al. High-throughput screening based identification of small molecule antagonists of integrin CD11b/CD18 ligand binding. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 394, 194-199 (2010).

48. Maiguel, D. et al. Small molecule-mediated activatin of the integrin CD11b/CD18 reduced inflammatory disease. Sci. Signal. 4, a57 (2011).

49. Faridi, M. H. et al. CD11b activation suppresses TLR-dependent inflammation and autoimmunity in systemic lupus erythematosus. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 1271-1283 (2017).

Although the invention has been described with reference to the above description, it will be understood that modifications and variations are encompassed within the spirit and scope of the invention. Accordingly, the invention is limited only by the following claims.

