# Introduction

Automated technologies and methods have become commonplace for hearing screening in adults, especially outside of North America [1]. Self-report measures, such as the Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly-Screening [2], are avail-able online and may be considered a low-tech approach to hearing screening.

High-tech approaches to hearing screening generally involve self-administered tests with stimuli presented under variable and uncontrolled listening conditions, and include screening with the use of land-line and cellular telephones, the internet, and hand-held consumer-electronic devices such as smartphones and tablet computers. Software applications have been developed for screening with the use of pure-tones, but results have proven problematic [3] [4] [5] [6] [7], and the calibration of devices and earphones remains a formidable challenge even for the most promising automated tests [8] [9]. However, progress is being made in addressing the calibration problem [10].

Since calibration problems make it difficult to deliver pure-tone tests over the internet and on mobile devices, stimulus materials consisting of speech in noise are used in some newer screening tests [11]- [19]. Although speech-in-noise screening provides a good measure of functional hearing capabilities, the correlation between these measures and pure-tone thresholds tends to be moderate [1] [18] [20]. Moreover, the outcome of some speech-in-noise screening measures differs qualitatively from pure-tone screening results. Instead of a dichotomous Pass-Fail outcome, the Speech Understanding in Noise screening test [13,14], for example, places respondents into one of three outcome categories: Pass, Hearing Check Advised, and Hearing Check Recommended.

The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association or ASHA [21] guidelines for hearing screening in adults stipulate that the stimulus materials consist of pure-tones at 1, 2 and 4 kHz presented at 25 dB HL. In order to pass the screening, the examinee must respond to all of the stimuli. Failure to respond at any one of the three frequencies results in a referral for a complete audiological evaluation. Since the stimuli are pure-tones presented at 25 dB HL, they must be delivered via a properly calibrated audiometer. Without a way to control the sound level and the user's selection of a transducer (earphones or speakers), it currently is not possible to develop a screening test which reflects the ASHA criteria and can be delivered over the internet. This is a formidable challenge facing the practice of tele-audiology and, in this regard, the ability to conduct hearing screening and simultaneously evaluate speech recognition ability may provide a useful alternative for testing conducted outside the clinical setting.

Using data obtained by the authors in earlier work [22], the present study investigates the degree to which an online adaptive test of speech recognition can serve as a proxy for pure-tone hearing screening methods. The investigation sought to quantify the accuracy of the NTID Speech Recognition Test (NSRT®) as a screening measure with regard to the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) criteria for hearing screening in adults [21]. Specifically, the present study sought to evaluate the effectiveness of the NSRT ® to separate test-takers who suffered from sensorineural hearing loss from those who were normally hearing, using the test criterion established by ASHA (i.e., the uniform screening level of 25 dB HL at pure-tone frequencies of 1, 2 and 4 kHz). Results of audiometric pure-tone testing in the clinical setting were compared to those predicted from online NSRT® testing. The outcome of each screening (i.e., traditional vs. NSRT®) was expressed as one of two possibilities: pass or refer a respondent for further evaluation.

# Materials and Methods

Test Materials and Protocol: The NSRT ® is a computer-based adaptive test of speech recognition. Results of validity and reliability studies have been reported previously, as have various applications of the test [22] [23]. These results indicate high reliability coefficients for the NSRT ® and moderate correlations with pure-tone thresholds across the octave frequencies 0. The NSRT ® is a computerized, adaptive test. It administers items utilizing an "up-down" method that selects items for presentation to respondents on the basis of their "information" value, a statistical concept. Like the stimuli used in adaptive psychophysical procedures, the stimuli used in adaptive testing are scaled along a continuum extending from low to high degrees of magnitude. However, rather than representing a physical construct such as the intensity of a sound, the continuum in this instance represents a domain of human performance, speech recognition ability [24] [25].

The "up-down" method of item selection insures that the items administered to each respondent are selected from a narrow range of difficulty spanning their level of ability, which is itself constantly updated as items are administered during the testing process. The increase/decrease in item difficulty is associated with variation in the phonetic and acoustic properties of the utterances. Items continue to be administered until one of several test termination criteria has been met. These criteria include a predetermined time limit and number of items, as well as a pre-selected level of reliability. In addition, testing is terminated when the number of items within a specified range of difficulty has been exhausted.

For additional detail and background information regarding the item content and design of the NSRT ® application, the interested reader is referred to our earlier work [22] [23]. The NSRT ® application itself is accessible at https://apps.ntid.rit.edu/NSRT/.

Participants and Procedure: Data used in this research were obtained from earlier studies conducted by the authors [22]  Pure-tone audiometric thresholds were obtained using standard audiometric procedures [26] at octave frequencies between 0.25 and 8 kHz. Air-bone gaps were ≤ 10 dB for all listeners. The signals were presented to participants' right/preferred ear through EAR-3A insert earphones at the NTID Audiology Clinic and the University at Buffalo, and TDH-50 supra-aural earphones at Syracuse University. Individuals with conductive hearing loss, as indicated by an air bone gap > 10 dB at any test frequency or failure to show a peak in the tympanogram between -200 and +200 daPa of ambient pressure in the test ear, were not included in the study.

Table 1 summarizes the average hearing thresholds of all study participants computed across three different frequency ranges (i.e., lower, middle, and higher frequency ranges). Speech recognition threshold (SRT) data are also shown in the table. In this study, we focus on hearing screening at pure-tone frequencies of 1, 2 and 4 kHz, the criterion established by ASHA.

In addition to pure-tone testing, all participants were administered the NSRT ® in both quiet and +5 dB SNR (signal-to-noise ratio) background noise (multi-talker babble). The NSRT ® was presented monaurally at 70 dB SPL or at participants' MCL if 70 dB SPL was less than 10 dB SPL re their PTA.

Data Analysis: In our earlier published work on the NSRT ® [22], we employ ordinary least squares (OLS) linear regression statistical procedures that combine the information obtained from an interactive testing experience in a man- To evaluate the effectiveness of the NSRT ® as a hearing screening measure, the present study focuses on pure-tone frequencies at 1, 2 and 4 kHz. ASHA screening guidelines stipulate that hearing thresholds in excess of 25 dB HL at any one of these frequencies is indicative of hearing loss, warranting referral for further evaluation. In this study, we compare participants' hearing thresholds obtained in a clinical setting, with pure-tone stimuli, with those estimated from the NSRT ® testing protocol at 1, 2 and 4 kHz. Strictly speaking, the NSRT ® data in this study were not obtained in the "home" setting. Consequently, the listening conditions under which these data were obtained (i.e., a laboratory setting) should be regarded as optimal.

# Results and Discussion

In the United States and Canada, the ASHA criteria for hearing screening are widely accepted as the gold standard. The ASHA standard for hearing screening in adults [21] is the criterion against which we evaluate the NSRT ® .

The effectiveness of a screening test is evaluated, in part, on the basis of its success in separating individuals with a target condition (i.e., hearing loss) from those without the same condition. The stimulus materials specified by ASHA for hearing screening in adults consist of pure-tones at 1, 2 and 4 kHz presented at 25 dB HL. To pass the screening criterion, test takers must respond to all of the stimuli. Failure at any one frequency results in a referral for audiological evaluation. The outcome of hearing screening, in accordance with ASHA guidelines, is a binary classification (pass or refer).

For the 120 participants in the current study, pure-tone hearing thresholds observed in the clinical setting at 1, 2 and 4 kHz provided the criterion measure (clinical outcomes) to which the screening test results were compared. Proxy thresholds estimated from the NSRT ® data provided by the same participants served as the screening outcome. The question of interest here centered on the agreement of the screening test outcome and criterion measure, the former obtainable via self-administration of an online testing procedure, the latter obtained under controlled clinical testing conditions.

Measurements of sensitivity and specificity are commonly used to evaluate the efficacy of screening tests. When the clinically-obtained thresholds were compared to the online hearing screening test outcomes, the sensitivity of the NSRT ® was found to be 95%. The specificity of the NSRT ® was found to be 87%. The NSRT ® protocol was designed first and foremost to identify those individuals with age-related hearing loss who, through a simple screening procedure, could benefit from an intervention that might, otherwise, not have been realized owing to more restricted, costly audiological testing procedures. Hence, the sensitivity of the NSRT ® was primary in importance here. Overall diagnostic accuracy for hearing screening using the NSRT ® was 91%.   angle > 90 degrees, not applicable here.

An angle of 0 degrees means that cos(θ) = 1, indicating that the vectors have identical directions. An angle of 90 degrees means that cos(θ) = 0, indicating that the vectors are perpendicular to one another.

Taking square roots, dp AA and dp BB hold length information. The formula for the computation of cos(θ) is a dot product/length product ratio, measuring the direction-length resemblance between two vectors representing corresponding data sets (i.e., observed vs. predicted hearing thresholds across the frequency range 1 to 4 kHz).  

# Conclusions

In this study, we evaluate the effectiveness of a hearing screening protocol that Data presented in this study clearly indicate that the NSRT ® can serve as a proxy for pure-tone hearing screening methods. These data are especially impressive in light of the fact that differences on the order of +10 dB have been reported between thresholds obtained on hearing impaired persons with automated versus manual audiometry and test-retest reliabilities in standard audiometry [28] [29] [30] [31]. The NSRT® is most suitable for screening where the primary cause of hearing loss is age-related, the vast majority of cases. The application was developed using linear statistical methods. As such, the NSRT ® application focuses on detection of gradually-sloping or ski-slope hearing losses, by far the most common kind of hearing loss configuration. It was not intended to diagnose more complex kinds of hearing loss.

Beyond the obvious performance criteria that hearing screening tests must be sensitive and specific, demonstrated herein for the NSRT®, ASHA [21] guidelines for hearing screening tests require that such tests be: 

# Declarations

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that there is NO conflict of interest regarding the publication of this paper.

