# DESCRIPTION

## FIELD

The present disclosure relates to systems and methods for delivery of gene editing machinery for the treatment of muscle diseases.

## INTRODUCTION

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a debilitating genetic disease that affects 1 in 5,000 live male births and is characterized by the lack of functional dystrophin protein, resulting in progressive lethal skeletal muscle degeneration. Skeletal muscle degeneration stimulates the satellite stem cell population to proliferate and give rise to new myofibers. In DMD, satellite cells are overwhelmed by the constant demand for muscle regeneration. Excessive proliferation results in replicative senescence and the satellite cell regenerative capacity gradually declines, giving way to relentless muscle degeneration accompanied by fibrosis and adipose deposition. Although clinical advancements have been made for treatment of this disease, a cure remains to be developed. Due to its genetic nature, DMD is an excellent candidate for therapeutic gene editing, and successful CRISPR/Cas9-based correction of the dystrophin gene has been demonstrated in animal models. To deliver CRISPR/Cas9 to the muscle, gene-editing constructs are most commonly packaged in adeno-associated viruses (AAV), which are effective gene delivery vectors used in over 100 clinical trials with three approved therapies in the United States or Europe. Because satellite cells continuously replenish skeletal muscle in response to tissue damage, the genetic correction of a population of these self-renewing cells could generate a sustained source of therapeutic gene production. In fact, because episomal AAV vectors are lost by dilution following cell division, permanent correction of the genomic copy of mutated genes in satellite cells may be a compelling advantage of gene editing technologies. Furthermore, efficient targeting of satellite cells with AAV vectors in vivo may enable many studies of the function and regulation of satellite cell biology within the native environment.

## SUMMARY

In an aspect, the disclosure relates to a vector composition. The vector composition may include (a) a polynucleotide sequence encoding at least one guide RNA (gRNA); (b) a polynucleotide sequence encoding a Cas9 protein or a fusion protein comprising the Cas9 protein; and (c) one or more promoters, each promoter operably linked to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the at least one gRNA and/or the polynucleotide sequence encoding the Cas9 protein or fusion protein. In some embodiments, the one or more promoters is a muscle specific promoter. In some embodiments, the one or more promoters comprises a CK8, SPc5-12, or MHCK7 promoter, or a combination thereof. In some embodiments, the composition is for use in editing a satellite cell. In some embodiments, the vector is a viral vector. In some embodiments, the viral vector is an Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector. In some embodiments, the AAV vector is an AAV8 vector, an AAV1 vector, an AAV6.2 vector, an AAVrh74 vector, or an AAV9 vector. In some embodiments, the composition comprises a single vector that comprises (a) the polynucleotide sequence encoding at least one gRNA, (b) the polynucleotide sequence encoding a Cas9 protein or a fusion protein comprising the Cas9 protein, and (c) the one or more promoters. In some embodiments, the composition comprises two or more vectors comprising (a) the polynucleotide sequence encoding at least one gRNA, (b) the polynucleotide sequence encoding a Cas9 protein or a fusion protein comprising the Cas9 protein, and (c) the one or more promoters. In some embodiments, the first vector comprises the polynucleotide sequence encoding the at least one gRNA; and the second vector comprises the polynucleotide sequence encoding the Cas9 protein or fusion protein. In some embodiments, the promoter is operably linked to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the Cas9 protein or fusion protein. In some embodiments, the promoter is operably linked to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the at least one gRNA. In some embodiments, the composition comprises two or more gRNAs, wherein the two or more gRNAs comprises a first gRNA and a second gRNA, wherein the first vector encodes the first gRNA, and wherein the second vector encodes the second gRNA. In some embodiments, the first vector further encodes the Cas9 protein or fusion protein. In some embodiments, the second vector further encodes the Cas9 protein or fusion protein. In some embodiments, the promoter is operably linked to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the Cas9 protein or fusion protein. In some embodiments, the promoter is operably linked to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the first gRNA and/or to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the second gRNA. In some embodiments, the Cas9 protein is a Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 protein or a Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 protein. In some embodiments, the CK8 promoter comprises a polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO: 51, wherein the Spc5-12 promoter comprises a polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO: 52, and wherein the MHCK7 promoter comprises a polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO: 53. In some embodiments, the vector is selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID NOs: 54-59. In some embodiments, the vector targets stem cells. In some embodiments, the vector has tropism for muscle satellite cells.

In a further aspect, the disclosure relates to a cell comprising a composition as detailed herein.

Another aspect of the disclosure provides a kit comprising a composition as detailed herein.

Another aspect of the disclosure provides a method of correcting a mutant gene in a cell. The method may include administering to a cell a composition as detailed herein. In some embodiments, the cell is a satellite cell. In some embodiments, the mutant gene is a dystrophin gene.

Another aspect of the disclosure provides a method of genome editing a mutant dystrophin gene in a subject. The method may include administering to the subject a genome editing composition comprising a composition as detailed herein. In some embodiments, the genome editing composition is administered to the subject intramuscularly, intravenously, or a combination thereof.

Another aspect of the disclosure provides a method of treating a subject in need thereof having a mutant dystrophin gene. The method may include administering to the subject a composition as detailed herein or a cell as detailed herein.

Another aspect of the disclosure provides a method of treating a subject with DMD. The method may include comprising contacting a cell with a composition as detailed herein.

In some embodiments, the cell is a muscle cell, a satellite cell, or a stem cell. In some embodiments, the cell is a satellite cell. In some embodiments, the cell is contacted with the composition in vivo, in vitro, and/or ex vivo. In some embodiments, the cell is transplanted to the subject after the cell is contacted with the composition. In some embodiments, the cell is allogeneic and autologous. In some embodiments, the cell is administered to the muscle of the subject. In some embodiments, the subject is immunosuppressed before being transplanted with the cell. In some embodiments, the cell is transplanted to the subject via a route selected from intramuscular, intravenous, caudal, intravitreous, intrastriatal, intraparenchymal, intrathecal, epidural, retrobulbar, subcutaneous, intracardiac, intracystic, intra-aiticular or intrathecal injection, epidural catheter infusion, sub arachnoid block catheter infusion, intravenous infusion, via nebulizer, via spray, via intravaginal routes, or a combination thereof.

Another aspect of the disclosure provides a method of screening an AAV vector with a satellite cell tropism. The method may include comprising administering to a mammal the AAV vector, wherein the mammal comprises an allele harboring a CAG-loxP-STOP-loxP-tdTomato expression cassette at Rosa26, and wherein the pax7 gene of the mammal is knocked in with a gene expressing a fluorescent protein. In some embodiments, the gene of interest encodes Cre. In some embodiments, the fluorescent protein comprises GFP, YFP, RFP, or CFP, or a variant thereof.

Another aspect of the disclosure provides a method of correcting a mutant gene in a satellite cell. The method may include administering to a cell a composition as detailed herein.

In some embodiments, the at least one gRNA binds and targets a polynucleotide sequence comprising SEQ ID NO: 49 or 50 or a complement thereof, or comprises a polynucleotide sequence comprising SEQ ID NO: 60 or 61 or a complement thereof.

The disclosure provides for other aspects and embodiments that will be apparent in light of the following detailed description and accompanying figures.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION

The herein described methods relate to the successful transduction of satellite cells by AAV, and these satellite cells can undergo gene-editing to restore the dystrophin reading frame in a humanized mouse model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy and successfully restore dystrophin.

Described herein are vector compositions, genetic constructs, and methods for delivering CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system to target the dystrophin gene in muscle stem cells, or satellite cells. The vector compositions described herein can include the use of one or more muscle-specific promoters, including, but not limited to CK8, SPc5-12, and/or MHCK7 in order to target the systems or compositions to muscle stem cells. The presently disclosed subject matter also provides for methods for delivering the genetic constructs or compositions comprising the same to muscle stem cells, or satellite cells. The vector can be an AAV, including modified AAV vectors. The presently disclosed subject matter relates to the effective and efficient delivery of active forms of this class of therapeutics to muscle stem cells, or satellite cells, thereby facilitating genome modification. The system and methods may also be used in genome engineering and correcting or reducing the effects of gene mutations.

### 1. Definitions

Unless otherwise defined, all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art. In case of conflict, the present document, including definitions, will control. Preferred methods and materials are described below, although methods and materials similar or equivalent to those described herein can be used in practice or testing of the present invention. All publications, patent applications, patents and other references mentioned herein are incorporated by reference in their entirety. The materials, methods, and examples disclosed herein are illustrative only and not intended to be limiting.

The terms “comprise(s),” “include(s),” “having,” “has,” “can,” “contain(s),” and variants thereof, as used herein, are intended to be open-ended transitional phrases, terms, or words that do not preclude the possibility of additional acts or structures. The singular forms “a,” “and,” and “the” include plural references unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. The present disclosure also contemplates other embodiments “comprising,” “consisting of,” and “consisting essentially of,” the embodiments or elements presented herein, whether explicitly set forth or not.

For the recitation of numeric ranges herein, each intervening number there between with the same degree of precision is explicitly contemplated. For example, for the range of 6-9, the numbers 7 and 8 are contemplated in addition to 6 and 9, and for the range 6.0-7.0, the number 6.0, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, and 7.0 are explicitly contemplated.

The term “about” or “approximately” as used herein as applied to one or more values of interest, refers to a value that is similar to a stated reference value, or within an acceptable error range for the particular value as determined by one of ordinary skill in the art, which will depend in part on how the value is measured or determined, such as the limitations of the measurement system. In certain aspects, the term “about” refers to a range of values that fall within 20%, 19%, 18%, 17%, 16%, 15%, 14%, 13%, 12%, 11%, 10%, 9%, 8%, 7%, 6%, 5%, 4%, 3%, 2%, 1%, or less in either direction (greater than or less than) of the stated reference value unless otherwise stated or otherwise evident from the context (except where such number would exceed 100% of a possible value). Alternatively, “about” can mean within 3 or more than 3 standard deviations, per the practice in the art. Alternatively, such as with respect to biological systems or processes, the term “about” can mean within an order of magnitude, preferably within 5-fold, and more preferably within 2-fold, of a value.

“Adeno-associated virus” or “AAV” as used interchangeably herein refers to a small virus belonging to the genus Dependovirus of the Parvoviridae family that infects humans and some other primate species. AAV is not currently known to cause disease and consequently the virus causes a very mild immune response.

“Allogeneic” refers to any material derived from another subject of the same species. Allogeneic cells are genetically distinct and immunologically incompatible yet belong to the same species. Typically, “allogeneic” is used to define cells, such as stem cells, that are transplanted from a donor to a recipient of the same species.

“Amino acid” as used herein refers to naturally occurring and non-natural synthetic amino acids, as well as amino acid analogs and amino acid mimetics that function in a manner similar to the naturally occurring amino acids. Naturally occurring amino acids are those encoded by the genetic code. Amino acids can be referred to herein by either their commonly known three-letter symbols or by the one-letter symbols recommended by the IUPAC-IUB Biochemical Nomenclature Commission. Amino acids include the side chain and polypeptide backbone portions.

“Autologous” refers to any material derived from a subject and re-introduced to the same subject.

“Binding region” as used herein refers to the region within a target region that is recognized and bound by the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system.

“Coding sequence” or “encoding nucleic acid” as used herein means the nucleic acids (RNA or DNA molecule) that comprise a nucleotide sequence which encodes a protein. The coding sequence can further include initiation and termination signals operably linked to regulatory elements including a promoter and polyadenylation signal capable of directing expression in the cells of an individual or mammal to which the nucleic acid is administered. The coding sequence may be codon optimized.

“Complement” or “complementary” as used herein means a nucleic acid can mean Watson-Crick (e.g., A-T/U and C-G) or Hoogsteen base pairing between nucleotides or nucleotide analogs of nucleic acid molecules. “Complementarity” refers to a property shared between two nucleic acid sequences, such that when they are aligned antiparallel to each other, the nucleotide bases at each position will be complementary.

The terms “control,” “reference level,” and “reference” are used herein interchangeably. The reference level may be a predetermined value or range, which is employed as a benchmark against which to assess the measured result. “Control group” as used herein refers to a group of control subjects. The predetermined level may be a cutoff value from a control group. The predetermined level may be an average from a control group. Cutoff values (or predetermined cutoff values) may be determined by Adaptive Index Model (AIM) methodology. Cutoff values (or predetermined cutoff values) may be determined by a receiver operating curve (ROC) analysis from biological samples of the patient group. ROC analysis, as generally known in the biological arts, is a determination of the ability of a test to discriminate one condition from another, e.g., to determine the performance of each marker in identifying a patient having CRC. A description of ROC analysis is provided in P. J. Heagerty et al. (Biometrics 2000, 56, 337-44), the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. Alternatively, cutoff values may be determined by a quartile analysis of biological samples of a patient group. For example, a cutoff value may be determined by selecting a value that corresponds to any value in the 25th-75th percentile range, preferably a value that corresponds to the 25th percentile, the 50th percentile or the 75th percentile, and more preferably the 75th percentile. Such statistical analyses may be performed using any method known in the art and can be implemented through any number of commercially available software packages (e.g., from Analyse-it Software Ltd., Leeds, UK; StataCorp LP, College Station, TX; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC.). The healthy or normal levels or ranges for a target or for a protein activity may be defined in accordance with standard practice. A control may be a subject or cell without a composition as detailed herein. A control may be a subject, or a sample therefrom, whose disease state is known. The subject, or sample therefrom, may be healthy, diseased, diseased prior to treatment, diseased during treatment, or diseased after treatment, or a combination thereof.

“Correcting”, “gene editing,” and “restoring” as used herein refers to changing a mutant gene that encodes a dysfunctional protein or truncated protein or no protein at all, such that a full-length functional or partially full-length functional protein expression is obtained. Correcting or restoring a mutant gene may include replacing the region of the gene that has the mutation or replacing the entire mutant gene with a copy of the gene that does not have the mutation with a repair mechanism such as homology-directed repair (HDR). Correcting or restoring a mutant gene may also include repairing a frameshift mutation that causes a premature stop codon, an aberrant splice acceptor site or an aberrant splice donor site, by generating a double stranded break in the gene that is then repaired using non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). NHEJ may add or delete at least one base pair during repair which may restore the proper reading frame and eliminate the premature stop codon. Correcting or restoring a mutant gene may also include disrupting an aberrant splice acceptor site or splice donor sequence. Correcting or restoring a mutant gene may also include deleting a non-essential gene segment by the simultaneous action of two nucleases on the same DNA strand in order to restore the proper reading frame by removing the DNA between the two nuclease target sites and repairing the DNA break by NHEJ.

“Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats” and “CRISPRs”, as used interchangeably herein, refers to loci containing multiple short direct repeats that are found in the genomes of approximately 40% of sequenced bacteria and 90% of sequenced archaea. The CRISPR system is a microbial nuclease system involved in defense against invading phages and plasmids that provides a form of acquired immunity. The CRISPR loci in microbial hosts contain a combination of CRISPR-associated (Cas) genes as well as non-coding RNA elements capable of programming the specificity of the CRISPR-mediated nucleic acid cleavage. Short segments of foreign DNA, called spacers, are incorporated into the genome between CRISPR repeats, and serve as a “memory” of past exposures. Cas proteins include, for example, Cas12a, Cas9, and Cascade proteins. Cas12a may also be referred to as “Cpf1.” Cas12a causes a staggered cut in double stranded DNA, while Cas9 produces a blunt cut. Cas9 forms a complex with the 3′ end of the sgRNA (which may be referred interchangeably herein as “gRNA”), and the protein-RNA pair recognizes its genomic target by complementary base pairing between the 5′ end of the gRNA sequence and a predefined 20 bp DNA sequence, known as the protospacer. This complex is directed to homologous loci of pathogen DNA via regions encoded within the crRNA, i.e., the protospacers, and protospacer-adjacent motifs (PAMs) within the pathogen genome. The non-coding CRISPR array is transcribed and cleaved within direct repeats into short crRNAs containing individual spacer sequences, which direct Cas nucleases to the target site (protospacer). By simply exchanging the 20 bp recognition sequence of the expressed gRNA, the Cas9 nuclease can be directed to new genomic targets. CRISPR spacers are used to recognize and silence exogenous genetic elements in a manner analogous to RNAi in eukaryotic organisms.

Three classes of CRISPR systems (Types I, 11, and Ill effector systems) are known. The Type II effector system carries out targeted DNA double-strand break in four sequential steps, using a single effector enzyme, Cas9, to cleave dsDNA. Compared to the Type I and Type III effector systems, which require multiple distinct effectors acting as a complex, the Type II effector system may function in alternative contexts such as eukaryotic cells. The Type II effector system consists of a long pre-crRNA, which is transcribed from the spacer-containing CRISPR locus, the Cas9 protein, and a tracrRNA, which is involved in pre-crRNA processing. The tracrRNAs hybridize to the repeat regions separating the spacers of the pre-crRNA, thus initiating dsRNA cleavage by endogenous RNase Ill. This cleavage is followed by a second cleavage event within each spacer by Cas9, producing mature crRNAs that remain associated with the tracrRNA and Cas9, forming a Cas9:crRNA-tracrRNA complex. Cas12a systems include crRNA for successful targeting, whereas Cas9 systems include both crRNA and tracrRNA.

The Cas9:crRNA-tracrRNA complex unwinds the DNA duplex and searches for sequences matching the crRNA to cleave. Target recognition occurs upon detection of complementarity between a “protospacer” sequence in the target DNA and the remaining spacer sequence in the crRNA. Cas9 mediates cleavage of target DNA if a correct protospacer-adjacent motif (PAM) is also present at the 3′ end of the protospacer. For protospacer targeting, the sequence must be immediately followed by the protospacer-adjacent motif (PAM), a short sequence recognized by the Cas9 nuclease that is required for DNA cleavage. Different Type II systems have differing PAM requirements.

An engineered form of the Type II effector system of S. pyogenes was shown to function in human cells for genome engineering. In this system, the Cas9 protein was directed to genomic target sites by a synthetically reconstituted “guide RNA” (“gRNA”, also used interchangeably herein as a chimeric single guide RNA (“sgRNA”)), which is a crRNA-tracrRNA fusion that obviates the need for RNase Ill and crRNA processing in general. Provided herein are CRISPR/Cas9-based engineered systems for use in gene editing and treating genetic diseases. The CRISPR/Cas9-based engineered systems can be designed to target any gene, including genes involved in, for example, a genetic disease, aging, tissue regeneration, or wound healing.

The term “directional promoter” refers to two or more promoters that are capable of driving transcription of two separate sequences in both directions. In one embodiment, one promoter drives transcription from 5′ to 3′ and the other promoter drives transcription from 3′ to 5′. In one embodiment, bidirectional promoters are double-strand transcription control elements that can drive expression of at least two separate sequences, for example, coding or non-coding sequences, in opposite directions. Such promoter sequences may be composed of two individual promoter sequences acting in opposite directions, such as one nucleotide sequence linked to the other (complementary) nucleotide sequence, including packaging constructs comprising the two promoters in opposite directions, for example, by hybrid, chimeric or fused sequences comprising the two individual promoter sequences, or at least core sequences thereof, or else by only one transcription regulating sequence that can initiate the transcription in both directions. The two individual promoter sequences, in some embodiments, may be juxtaposed or a linker sequence can be located between the first and second sequences. A promoter sequence may be reversed to be combined with another promoter sequence in the opposite orientation. Genes located on both sides of a bidirectional promoter can be operably linked to a single transcription control sequence or region that drives the transcription in both directions. In other embodiments, the bidirectional promoters are not juxtaposed. For example, one promoter may drive transcription on the 5′ end of a nucleotide fragment, and another promoter may drive transcription from the 3′ end of the same fragment. In another embodiment, a first gene can be operably linked to the bidirectional promoter with or without further regulatory elements, such as a reporter or terminator elements, and a second gene can be operably linked to the bidirectional promoter in the opposite direction and by the complementary promoter sequence, again with or without further regulatory elements.

“Donor DNA”, “donor template,” and “repair template” as used interchangeably herein refers to a double-stranded DNA fragment or molecule that includes at least a portion of the gene of interest. The donor DNA may encode a full-functional protein or a partially functional protein.

“Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy” or “DMD” as used interchangeably herein refers to a recessive, fatal, X-linked disorder that results in muscle degeneration and eventual death. DMD is a common hereditary monogenic disease and occurs in 1 in 3500 males. DMD is the result of inherited or spontaneous mutations that cause nonsense or frame shift mutations in the dystrophin gene. The majority of dystrophin mutations that cause DMD are deletions of exons that disrupt the reading frame and cause premature translation termination in the dystrophin gene. DMD patients typically lose the ability to physically support themselves during childhood, become progressively weaker during the teenage years, and die in their twenties.

“Dystrophin” as used herein refers to a rod-shaped cytoplasmic protein which is a part of a protein complex that connects the cytoskeleton of a muscle fiber to the surrounding extracellular matrix through the cell membrane. Dystrophin provides structural stability to the dystroglycan complex of the cell membrane that is responsible for regulating muscle cell integrity and function. The dystrophin gene or “DMD gene” as used interchangeably herein is 2.2 megabases at locus Xp21. The primary transcription measures about 2,400 kb with the mature mRNA being about 14 kb. 79 exons code for the protein which is over 3500 amino acids.

“Encapsulated” as used herein refers to refers to a lipid nanoparticle that provides the mRNA or gRNA with full encapsulation, partial encapsulation, or both. In an embodiment, the nucleic acid (e.g., mRNA or gRNA) is fully encapsulated in the lipid nanoparticle or microparticle.

“Enhancer” as used herein refers to non-coding DNA sequences containing multiple activator and repressor binding sites. Enhancers range from 200 bp to 1 kb in length and may be either proximal, 5′ upstream to the promoter or within the first intron of the regulated gene, or distal, in introns of neighboring genes or intergenic regions far away from the locus. Through DNA looping, active enhancers contact the promoter dependently of the core DNA binding motif promoter specificity. 4 to 5 enhancers may interact with a promoter. Similarly, enhancers may regulate more than one gene without linkage restriction and may “skip” neighboring genes to regulate more distant ones. Transcriptional regulation may involve elements located in a chromosome different to one where the promoter resides. Proximal enhancers or promoters of neighboring genes may serve as platforms to recruit more distal elements.

“Exons 45 through 55” of dystrophin as used herein refers to an area where roughly 45% of all dystrophin mutations are located. Exon 45-55 deletions are associated with very mild Becker phenotypes and have even been found in asymptomatic individuals. Exon 45-55 multiexon skipping would be beneficial for roughly 50% of all DMD patients.

“Exon 51” as used herein refers to the exon 51 of the dystrophin gene. Exon 51 is frequently adjacent to frame-disrupting deletions in DMD patients and has been targeted in clinical trials for oligonucleotide-based exon skipping. A clinical trial for the exon 51 skipping compound eteplirsen reported a significant functional benefit across 48 weeks, with an average of 47% dystrophin positive fibers compared to baseline. Mutations in exon 51 may be suited for permanent correction by NHEJ-based genome editing.

“Frameshift” or “frameshift mutation” as used interchangeably herein refers to a type of gene mutation wherein the addition or deletion of one or more nucleotides causes a shift in the reading frame of the codons in the mRNA. The shift in reading frame may lead to the alteration in the amino acid sequence at protein translation, such as a missense mutation or a premature stop codon.

“Functional” and “full-functional” as used herein describes protein that has biological activity. A “functional gene” refers to a gene transcribed to mRNA, which is translated to a functional protein.

“Fusion protein” as used herein refers to a chimeric protein created through the joining of two or more genes that originally coded for separate proteins. The translation of the fusion gene results in a single polypeptide with functional properties derived from each of the original proteins.

“Genetic construct” as used herein refers to a polynucleotide sequence that encodes a protein and the genetic sequences directing its expression. The coding sequence may include initiation and termination signals operably linked to regulatory elements including a promoter and polyadenylation signals capable of directing expression in the cells of the subject to whom the polynucleotide is administered. As used herein, the term “expressible form” refers to gene constructs that contain the necessary regulatory elements operably linked to a coding sequence that encodes a protein such that when present in the cell of the subject, the coding sequence will be expressed.

“Genetic disease” as used herein refers to a disease that is partially or completely, directly or indirectly, caused by one or more abnormalities in the genome, especially a condition that is present from birth. The abnormality may be a mutation such as a substitution, an insertion, or a deletion. The abnormality may affect the coding sequence of the gene or its regulatory sequence. The genetic disease may be, but not limited to DMD, hemophilia, cystic fibrosis, Huntington's chorea, familial hypercholesterolemia (LDL receptor defect), hepatoblastoma, Wilson's disease, congenital hepatic porphyria, inherited disorders of hepatic metabolism, Lesch Nyhan syndrome, sickle cell anemia, thalassaemias, xeroderma pigmentosum, Fanconi's anemia, retinitis pigmentosa, ataxia telangiectasia, Bloom's syndrome, retinoblastoma, and Tay-Sachs disease.

“Genome editing” or “gene editing” as used herein refers to changing a gene. Genome editing may include correcting or restoring a mutant gene or adding additional mutations. Genome editing may include knocking out a gene, such as a mutant gene or a normal gene. Genome editing may be used to treat disease or, for example, enhance muscle repair, by changing the gene of interest. In some embodiments, the compositions and methods detailed herein are for use in somatic cells and not germ line cells.

The term “heterologous” as used herein refers to nucleic acid comprising two or more subsequences that are not found in the same relationship to each other in nature. For instance, a nucleic acid that is recombinantly produced typically has two or more sequences from unrelated genes synthetically arranged to make a new functional nucleic acid, for example, a promoter from one source and a coding region from another source. The two nucleic acids are thus heterologous to each other in this context. When added to a cell, the recombinant nucleic acids would also be heterologous to the endogenous genes of the cell. Thus, in a chromosome, a heterologous nucleic acid would include a non-native (non-naturally occurring) nucleic acid that has integrated into the chromosome, or a non-native (non-naturally occurring) extrachromosomal nucleic acid. Similarly, a heterologous protein indicates that the protein comprises two or more subsequences that are not found in the same relationship to each other in nature (for example, a “fusion protein,” where the two subsequences are encoded by a single nucleic acid sequence).

“Homology-directed repair” or “HDR” as used interchangeably herein refers to a mechanism in cells to repair double strand DNA lesions when a homologous piece of DNA is present in the nucleus, mostly in G2 and S phase of the cell cycle. HDR uses a donor DNA template to guide repair and may be used to create specific sequence changes to the genome, including the targeted addition of whole genes. If a donor template is provided along with the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system, then the cellular machinery will repair the break by homologous recombination, which is enhanced several orders of magnitude in the presence of DNA cleavage. When the homologous DNA piece is absent, non-homologous end joining may take place instead.

“Identical” or “identity” as used herein in the context of two or more polynucleotide or polypeptide sequences means that the sequences have a specified percentage of residues that are the same over a specified region. The percentage may be calculated by optimally aligning the two sequences, comparing the two sequences over the specified region, determining the number of positions at which the identical residue occurs in both sequences to yield the number of matched positions, dividing the number of matched positions by the total number of positions in the specified region, and multiplying the result by 100 to yield the percentage of sequence identity. In cases where the two sequences are of different lengths or the alignment produces one or more staggered ends and the specified region of comparison includes only a single sequence, the residues of single sequence are included in the denominator but not the numerator of the calculation. When comparing DNA and RNA, thymine (T) and uracil (U) may be considered equivalent. Identity may be performed manually or by using a computer sequence algorithm such as BLAST or BLAST 2.0.

“Mutant gene” or “mutated gene” as used interchangeably herein refers to a gene that has undergone a detectable mutation. A mutant gene has undergone a change, such as the loss, gain, or exchange of genetic material, which affects the normal transmission and expression of the gene. A “disrupted gene” as used herein refers to a mutant gene that has a mutation that causes a premature stop codon. The disrupted gene product is truncated relative to a full-length undisrupted gene product.

“Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway” as used herein refers to a pathway that repairs double-strand breaks in DNA by directly ligating the break ends without the need for a homologous template. The template-independent re-ligation of DNA ends by NHEJ is a stochastic, error-prone repair process that introduces random micro-insertions and micro-deletions (indels) at the DNA breakpoint. This method may be used to intentionally disrupt, delete, or alter the reading frame of targeted gene sequences. NHEJ typically uses short homologous DNA sequences called microhomologies to guide repair. These microhomologies are often present in single-stranded overhangs on the end of double-strand breaks. When the overhangs are perfectly compatible, NHEJ usually repairs the break accurately, yet imprecise repair leading to loss of nucleotides may also occur but is much more common when the overhangs are not compatible.

“Normal gene” as used herein refers to a gene that has not undergone a change, such as a loss, gain, or exchange of genetic material. The normal gene undergoes normal gene transmission and gene expression. For example, a normal gene may be a wild-type gene.

“Nuclease mediated NHEJ” as used herein refers to NHEJ that is initiated after a nuclease, such as a Cas9, cuts double stranded DNA.

“Nucleic acid” or “oligonucleotide” or “polynucleotide” as used herein means at least two nucleotides covalently linked together. The depiction of a single strand also defines the sequence of the complementary strand. Thus, a polynucleotide also encompasses the complementary strand of a depicted single strand. Many variants of a polynucleotide may be used for the same purpose as a given polynucleotide. Thus, a polynucleotide also encompasses substantially identical polynucleotides and complements thereof. A single strand provides a probe that may hybridize to a target sequence under stringent hybridization conditions. Thus, a polynucleotide also encompasses a probe that hybridizes under stringent hybridization conditions. Polynucleotides may be single stranded or double stranded or may contain portions of both double stranded and single stranded sequence. The polynucleotide can be nucleic acid, natural or synthetic, DNA, genomic DNA, cDNA, RNA, or a hybrid, where the polynucleotide can contain combinations of deoxyribo- and ribo-nucleotides, and combinations of bases including, for example, uracil, adenine, thymine, cytosine, guanine, inosine, xanthine hypoxanthine, isocytosine, and isoguanine. Polynucleotides can be obtained by chemical synthesis methods or by recombinant methods.

“Open reading frame” refers to a stretch of codons that begins with a start codon and ends at a stop codon. In eukaryotic genes with multiple exons, introns are removed, and exons are then joined together after transcription to yield the final mRNA for protein translation. An open reading frame may be a continuous stretch of codons. In some embodiments, the open reading frame only applies to spliced mRNAs, not genomic DNA, for expression of a protein.

“Operably linked” as used herein means that expression of a gene is under the control of a promoter with which it is spatially connected. A promoter may be positioned 5′ (upstream) or 3′ (downstream) of a gene under its control. The distance between the promoter and a gene may be approximately the same as the distance between that promoter and the gene it controls in the gene from which the promoter is derived. As is known in the art, variation in this distance may be accommodated without loss of promoter function. Nucleic acid or amino acid sequences are “operably linked” (or “operatively linked”) when placed into a functional relationship with one another. For instance, a promoter or enhancer is operably linked to a coding sequence if it regulates, or contributes to the modulation of, the transcription of the coding sequence. Operably linked DNA sequences are typically contiguous, and operably linked amino acid sequences are typically contiguous and in the same reading frame. However, since enhancers generally function when separated from the promoter by up to several kilobases or more and intronic sequences may be of variable lengths, some polynucleotide elements may be operably linked but not contiguous. Similarly, certain amino acid sequences that are non-contiguous in a primary polypeptide sequence may nonetheless be operably linked due to, for example folding of a polypeptide chain. With respect to fusion polypeptides, the terms “operatively linked” and “operably linked” can refer to the fact that each of the components performs the same function in linkage to the other component as it would if it were not so linked.

“Partially-functional” as used herein describes a protein that is encoded by a mutant gene and has less biological activity than a functional protein but more than a non-functional protein.

A “peptide” or “polypeptide” is a linked sequence of two or more amino acids linked by peptide bonds. The polypeptide can be natural, synthetic, or a modification or combination of natural and synthetic. Peptides and polypeptides include proteins such as binding proteins, receptors, and antibodies. The terms “polypeptide”, “protein,” and “peptide” are used interchangeably herein. “Primary structure” refers to the amino acid sequence of a particular peptide. “Secondary structure” refers to locally ordered, three dimensional structures within a polypeptide. These structures are commonly known as domains, for example, enzymatic domains, extracellular domains, transmembrane domains, pore domains, and cytoplasmic tail domains. “Domains” are portions of a polypeptide that form a compact unit of the polypeptide and are typically 15 to 350 amino acids long. Exemplary domains include domains with enzymatic activity or ligand binding activity. Typical domains are made up of sections of lesser organization such as stretches of beta-sheet and alpha-helices. “Tertiary structure” refers to the complete three-dimensional structure of a polypeptide monomer. “Quaternary structure” refers to the three-dimensional structure formed by the noncovalent association of independent tertiary units. A “motif” is a portion of a polypeptide sequence and includes at least two amino acids. A motif may be 2 to 20, 2 to 15, or 2 to 10 amino acids in length. In some embodiments, a motif includes 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 sequential amino acids. A domain may be comprised of a series of the same type of motif.

“Premature stop codon” or “out-of-frame stop codon” as used interchangeably herein refers to nonsense mutation in a sequence of DNA, which results in a stop codon at location not normally found in the wild-type gene. A premature stop codon may cause a protein to be truncated or shorter compared to the full-length version of the protein.

“Promoter” as used herein means a synthetic or naturally derived molecule which is capable of conferring, activating or enhancing expression of a nucleic acid in a cell. A promoter may comprise one or more specific transcriptional regulatory sequences to further enhance expression and/or to alter the spatial expression and/or temporal expression of same. A promoter may also comprise distal enhancer or repressor elements, which may be located as much as several thousand base pairs from the start site of transcription. A promoter may be derived from sources including viral, bacterial, fungal, plants, insects, and animals. A promoter may regulate the expression of a gene component constitutively, or differentially with respect to cell, the tissue or organ in which expression occurs or, with respect to the developmental stage at which expression occurs, or in response to external stimuli such as physiological stresses, pathogens, metal ions, or inducing agents. Representative examples of promoters include the bacteriophage T7 promoter, bacteriophage T3 promoter, SP6 promoter, lac operator-promoter, tac promoter, SV40 late promoter, SV40 early promoter, RSV-LTR promoter, CMV IE promoter, SV40 early promoter or SV40 late promoter, human U6 (hU6) promoter, and CMV IE promoter. Promoters that target muscle-specific stem cells may include the CK8 promoter, the Spc5-12 promoter, and the MHCK7 promoter.

The term “recombinant” when used with reference to, for example, a cell, nucleic acid, protein, or vector, indicates that the cell, nucleic acid, protein, or vector, has been modified by the introduction of a heterologous nucleic acid or protein or the alteration of a native nucleic acid or protein, or that the cell is derived from a cell so modified. Thus, for example, recombinant cells express genes that are not found within the native (naturally occurring) form of the cell or express a second copy of a native gene that is otherwise normally or abnormally expressed, under expressed, or not expressed at all.

“Sample” or “test sample” as used herein can mean any sample in which the presence and/or level of a target is to be detected or determined or any sample comprising a DNA targeting or gene editing system or component thereof as detailed herein. Samples may include liquids, solutions, emulsions, or suspensions. Samples may include a medical sample. Samples may include any biological fluid or tissue, such as blood, whole blood, fractions of blood such as plasma and serum, muscle, interstitial fluid, sweat, saliva, urine, tears, synovial fluid, bone marrow, cerebrospinal fluid, nasal secretions, sputum, amniotic fluid, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, gastric lavage, emesis, fecal matter, lung tissue, peripheral blood mononuclear cells, total white blood cells, lymph node cells, spleen cells, tonsil cells, cancer cells, tumor cells, bile, digestive fluid, skin, or combinations thereof. In some embodiments, the sample comprises an aliquot. In other embodiments, the sample comprises a biological fluid. Samples can be obtained by any means known in the art. The sample can be used directly as obtained from a patient or can be pre-treated, such as by filtration, distillation, extraction, concentration, centrifugation, inactivation of interfering components, addition of reagents, and the like, to modify the character of the sample in some manner as discussed herein or otherwise as is known in the art.

“Satellite cells,” also known as “myosatellite cells” or “muscle stem cells,” are small multipotent cells with very little cytoplasm found in mature muscle. Satellite cells are precursors to skeletal muscle cells and able to give rise to satellite cells or differentiated skeletal muscle cells.

“Site-specific nuclease” as used herein refers to an enzyme capable of specifically recognizing and cleaving DNA sequences. The site-specific nuclease may be engineered. Examples of engineered site-specific nucleases may include zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs), TAL effector nucleases (TALENs), and CRISPR/Cas9-based systems.

“Stem cell” generally refers to a cell that on division faces two developmental options: the daughter cells can be identical to the original cell (self-renewal) or they may be the progenitors of more specialized cell types (differentiation). The stem cell is therefore capable of adopting one or other pathway (a further pathway exists in which one of each cell type can be formed). Stem cells are therefore cells which are not terminally differentiated and are able to produce cells of other types.

“Subject” and “patient” as used herein interchangeably refers to any vertebrate, including, but not limited to, a mammal that wants or is in need of the herein described compositions or methods. The subject may be a human or a non-human. The subject may be a vertebrate. The subject may be a mammal. The mammal may be a primate or a non-primate. The mammal can be a non-primate such as, for example, cow, pig, camel, llama, hedgehog, anteater, platypus, elephant, alpaca, horse, goat, rabbit, sheep, hamsters, guinea pig, cat, dog, rat, and mouse. The mammal can be a primate such as a human. The mammal can be a non-human primate such as, for example, monkey, cynomolgous monkey, rhesus monkey, chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, and gibbon. The subject may be of any age or stage of development, such as, for example, an adult, an adolescent, or an infant. The subject may be male. The subject may be female. In some embodiments, the subject has a specific genetic marker. The subject may be undergoing other forms of treatment.

“Substantially identical” can mean that a first and second amino acid or polynucleotide sequence are at least 60%, 65%, 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, or 99% over a region of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 70, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800, 900, 1000, 1100 amino acids or nucleotides, respectively.

“Target gene” as used herein refers to any nucleotide sequence encoding a known or putative gene product. The target gene may be a mutated gene involved in a genetic disease.

“Target region” as used herein refers to the region of the target gene to which the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing or targeting system is designed to bind.

“Transcriptional regulatory elements” or “regulatory elements” refers to a genetic element which can control the expression of nucleic acid sequences, such as activate, enhancer, or decrease expression, or alter the spatial and/or temporal expression of a nucleic acid sequence. Examples of regulatory elements include, for example, promoters, enhancers, splicing signals, polyadenylation signals, and termination signals. A regulatory element can be “endogenous,” “exogenous,” or “heterologous” with respect to the gene to which it is operably linked. An “endogenous” regulatory element is one which is naturally linked with a given gene in the genome. An “exogenous” or “heterologous” regulatory element is one which is not normally linked with a given gene but is placed in operable linkage with a gene by genetic manipulation.

“Transgene” as used herein refers to a gene or genetic material containing a gene sequence that has been isolated from one organism and is introduced into a different organism. This non-native segment of DNA may retain the ability to produce RNA or protein in the transgenic organism, or it may alter the normal function of the transgenic organism's genetic code. The introduction of a transgene has the potential to change the phenotype of an organism.

“Treatment” or “treating” or “treatment” when referring to protection of a subject from a disease, means suppressing, repressing, reversing, alleviating, ameliorating, or inhibiting the progress of disease, or completely eliminating a disease. A treatment may be either performed in an acute or chronic way. The term also refers to reducing the severity of a disease or symptoms associated with such disease prior to affliction with the disease. Preventing the disease involves administering a composition of the present invention to a subject prior to onset of the disease. Suppressing the disease involves administering a composition of the present invention to a subject after induction of the disease but before its clinical appearance. Repressing or ameliorating the disease involves administering a composition of the present invention to a subject after clinical appearance of the disease.

“Variant” used herein with respect to a polynucleotide means (i) a portion or fragment of a referenced nucleotide sequence; (ii) the complement of a referenced nucleotide sequence or portion thereof; (iii) a nucleic acid that is substantially identical to a referenced nucleic acid or the complement thereof; or (iv) a nucleic acid that hybridizes under stringent conditions to the referenced nucleic acid, complement thereof, or a sequences substantially identical thereto.

“Variant” with respect to a peptide or polypeptide that differs in amino acid sequence by the insertion, deletion, or conservative substitution of amino acids, but retain at least one biological activity. Variant may also mean a protein with an amino acid sequence that is substantially identical to a referenced protein with an amino acid sequence that retains at least one biological activity. Representative examples of “biological activity” include the ability to be bound by a specific antibody or polypeptide or to promote an immune response. Variant can mean a functional fragment thereof. Variant can also mean multiple copies of a polypeptide. The multiple copies can be in tandem or separated by a linker. A conservative substitution of an amino acid, for example, replacing an amino acid with a different amino acid of similar properties (for example, hydrophilicity, degree and distribution of charged regions) is recognized in the art as typically involving a minor change. These minor changes may be identified, in part, by considering the hydropathic index of amino acids, as understood in the art (Kyte et al., J. Mol. Biol. 1982, 157, 105-132). The hydropathic index of an amino acid is based on a consideration of its hydrophobicity and charge. It is known in the art that amino acids of similar hydropathic indexes may be substituted and still retain protein function. In one aspect, amino acids having hydropathic indexes of ±2 are substituted. The hydrophilicity of amino acids may also be used to reveal substitutions that would result in proteins retaining biological function. A consideration of the hydrophilicity of amino acids in the context of a peptide permits calculation of the greatest local average hydrophilicity of that peptide. Substitutions may be performed with amino acids having hydrophilicity values within ±2 of each other. Both the hydrophobicity index and the hydrophilicity value of amino acids are influenced by the particular side chain of that amino acid. Consistent with that observation, amino acid substitutions that are compatible with biological function are understood to depend on the relative similarity of the amino acids, and particularly the side chains of those amino acids, as revealed by the hydrophobicity, hydrophilicity, charge, size, and other properties.

“Vector” as used herein means a nucleic acid sequence containing an origin of replication. A vector may be a viral vector, bacteriophage, bacterial artificial chromosome, or yeast artificial chromosome. A vector may be a DNA or RNA vector. A vector may be a self-replicating extrachromosomal vector, and preferably, is a DNA plasmid. For example, the vector may encode a Cas9 protein and at least one gRNA molecule.

Unless otherwise defined herein, scientific and technical terms used in connection with the present disclosure shall have the meanings that are commonly understood by those of ordinary skill in the art. For example, any nomenclatures used in connection with, and techniques of, cell and tissue culture, molecular biology, immunology, microbiology, genetics, and protein and nucleic acid chemistry and hybridization described herein are those that are well known and commonly used in the art. The meaning and scope of the terms should be clear; in the event however of any latent ambiguity, definitions provided herein take precedent over any dictionary or extrinsic definition. Further, unless otherwise required by context, singular terms shall include pluralities and plural terms shall include the singular.

### 2. Dystrophin Gene

Dystrophin is a rod-shaped cytoplasmic protein which is a part of a protein complex that connects the cytoskeleton of a muscle fiber to the surrounding extracellular matrix through the cell membrane. Dystrophin provides structural stability to the dystroglycan complex of the cell membrane. The dystrophin gene is 2.2 megabases at locus Xp21. The primary transcription measures about 2,400 kb with the mature mRNA being about 14 kb. 79 exons include approximately 2.2 million nucleotides and code for the protein which is over 3500 amino acids. Normal skeleton muscle tissue contains only small amounts of dystrophin, but its absence of abnormal expression leads to the development of severe and incurable symptoms. Some mutations in the dystrophin gene lead to the production of defective dystrophin and severe dystrophic phenotype in affected patients. Some mutations in the dystrophin gene lead to partially-functional dystrophin protein and a much milder dystrophic phenotype in affected patients.

DMD is the result of inherited or spontaneous mutations that cause nonsense or frame shift mutations in the dystrophin gene. DMD is the most prevalent lethal heritable childhood disease and affects approximately one in 5,000 newborn males. DMD is characterized by progressive muscle weakness, often leading to mortality in subjects at age mid-twenties, due to the lack of a functional dystrophin gene. Most mutations are deletions in the dystrophin gene that disrupt the reading frame. Naturally occurring mutations and their consequences are relatively well understood for DMD. In-frame deletions that occur in the exon 45-55 regions contained within the rod domain can produce highly functional dystrophin proteins, and many carriers are asymptomatic or display mild symptoms. Exons 45-55 of dystrophin are a mutational hotspot. Furthermore, more than 60% of patients may be treated by targeting exons in this region of the dystrophin gene. Efforts have been made to restore the disrupted dystrophin reading frame in DMD patients by skipping non-essential exon(s) (e.g., exon 45 skipping) during mRNA splicing to produce internally deleted but functional dystrophin proteins. The deletion of internal dystrophin exon(s) (for example, deletion of exon 45) may retain the proper reading frame and can generate an internally truncated but partially functional dystrophin protein. Deletions between exons 45-55 of dystrophin can result in a phenotype that is much milder compared to DMD.

A dystrophin gene may be a mutant dystrophin gene. A dystrophin gene may be a wild-type dystrophin gene. A dystrophin gene may have a sequence that is functionally identical to a wild-type dystrophin gene, for example, the sequence may be codon-optimized but still encode for the same protein as the wild-type dystrophin. A mutant dystrophin gene may include one or more mutations relative to the wild-type dystrophin gene. Mutations may include, for example, nucleotide deletions, substitutions, additions, transversions, or combinations thereof. Mutations may include deletions of all or parts of at least one intron and/or exon. An exon of a mutant dystrophin gene may be mutated or at least partially deleted from the dystrophin gene. An exon of a mutant dystrophin gene may be fully deleted. A mutant dystrophin gene may have a portion or fragment thereof that corresponds to the corresponding sequence in the wild-type dystrophin gene. In some embodiments, a disrupted dystrophin gene caused by a deleted or mutated exon can be restored in DMD patients by adding back the corresponding wild-type exon. In some embodiments, disrupted dystrophin caused by a deleted or mutated exon 52 can be restored in DMD patients by adding back in wild-type exon 52. In certain embodiments, addition of exon 52 to restore reading frame ameliorates the phenotype in DMD subjects, including DMD subjects with deletion mutations. In certain embodiments, one or more exons may be added and inserted into the disrupted dystrophin gene. The one or more exons may be added and inserted so as to correct the corresponding mutated or deleted exon(s) in dystrophin. The one or more exons may be added and inserted into the disrupted dystrophin gene in addition to adding back and inserting the exon 52. In certain embodiments, exon 52 of a dystrophin gene refers to the 52nd exon of the dystrophin gene. Exon 52 is frequently adjacent to frame-disrupting deletions in DMD patients.

### 3. CRISPR/Cas9-Based Gene Editing System

Provided herein are CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing systems. The CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system may be used to correct mutations and/or deleted exons in mutated genomic sequences thereby restoring appropriate function to the protein that is expressed from the targeted sequence(s). The CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system may include a Cas9 protein or a fusion protein, and at least one gRNA, and may also be referred to as a “CRISPR-Cas system.”

a. Cas9 Protein

Cas9 protein is an endonuclease that cleaves nucleic acid and is encoded by the CRISPR loci and is involved in the Type II CRISPR system. The Cas9 protein can be from any bacterial or archaea species, including, but not limited to, Streptococcus pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), Acidovorax avenae, Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae, Actinobacillus succinogenes, Actinobacillus suis, Actinomyces sp., cycliphilus denitrificans, Aminomonas paucivorans, Bacillus cereus, Bacillus smithii, Bacillus thuringiensis, Bacteroides sp., Blastopirellula marina, Bradyrhizobium sp., Brevibacillus laterosporus, Campylobacter coli, Campylobacter jejuni, Campylobacter tari, Candidatus Puniceipirillum, Clostridium cellulolyticum, Clostridium perfringens, Corynebacterum accolens, Corynebacterium diphtheria, Corynebacterum matruchotii, Dinoroseobacter shibae, Eubacterium dolichum, Gamma proteobacterium, Gluconacetobacter diazotrophicus, Haemophilus parainfluenzae, Haemophilus sputorum, Helicobacter canadensis, Helicobacter cinaedi, Helicobacter mustelae, Ilyobacter polytropus, Kingella kingae, Lactobacillus crispatus, Listera ivanovii, Listera monocytogenes, Listeraceae bacterium, Methylocystis sp., Methylosinus trichosporium, Mobiluncus mulieris, Neisseria bacilliformis, Neisseria cinerea, Neisseria flavescens, Neisseria lactamica, Neisseria sp., Neisseria wadsworthii, Nitrosomonas sp., Parvibaculum lavamentivorans, Pasteurella multocida, Phascolarctobacterium succinatutens, Ralstonia syzygii, Rhodopseudomonas palustris, Rhodovulum sp., Simonsiella muelleri, Sphingomonas sp., Sporolactobacillus vineae, Staphylococcus lugdunensis, Streptococcus sp., Subdoligranulum sp., Tistrella mobilis, Treponema sp., or Verminephrobacter eiseniae. In certain embodiments, the Cas9 molecule is a Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 molecule (also referred herein as “SpCas9”). SpCas9 may comprise an amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO: 18. In certain embodiments, the Cas9 molecule is a Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 molecule (also referred herein as “SaCas9”). SaCas9 may comprise an amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO: 19.

A Cas9 molecule or a Cas9 fusion protein can interact with one or more gRNA molecule(s) and, in concert with the gRNA molecule(s), can localize to a site which comprises a target region, and in certain embodiments, a PAM sequence. The Cas9 protein forms a complex with the 3′ end of a gRNA. The ability of a Cas9 molecule or a Cas9 fusion protein to recognize a PAM sequence can be determined, for example, by using a transformation assay as known in the art.

The specificity of the CRISPR-based system may depend on two factors: the target sequence and the protospacer-adjacent motif (PAM). The target sequence is located on the 5′ end of the gRNA and is designed to bond with base pairs on the host DNA at the correct DNA sequence known as the protospacer. By simply exchanging the recognition sequence of the gRNA, the Cas9 protein can be directed to new genomic targets. The PAM sequence is located on the DNA to be altered and is recognized by a Cas9 protein. PAM recognition sequences of the Cas9 protein can be species specific.

In certain embodiments, the ability of a Cas9 molecule or a Cas9 fusion protein to interact with and cleave a target nucleic acid is PAM sequence dependent. A PAM sequence is a sequence in the target nucleic acid. In certain embodiments, cleavage of the target nucleic acid occurs upstream from the PAM sequence. Cas9 molecules from different bacterial species can recognize different sequence motifs (for example, PAM sequences). A Cas9 molecule of S. pyogenes may recognize the PAM sequence of NRG (5′-NRG-3′, where R is any nucleotide residue, and in some embodiments, R is either A or G, SEQ ID NO: 1). In certain embodiments, a Cas9 molecule of S. pyogenes may naturally prefer and recognize the sequence motif NGG (SEQ ID NO: 2) and directs cleavage of a target nucleic acid sequence 1 to 10, for example, 3 to 5, bp upstream from that sequence. In some embodiments, a Cas9 molecule of S. pyogenes accepts other PAM sequences, such as NAG (SEQ ID NO: 3) in engineered systems (Hsu et al., Nature Biotechnology 2013 doi:10.1038/nbt.2647). In certain embodiments, a Cas9 molecule of S. thermophilus recognizes the sequence motif NGGNG (SEQ ID NO: 4) and/or NNAGAAW (W=A or T) (SEQ ID NO: 5) and directs cleavage of a target nucleic acid sequence 1 to 10, for example, 3 to 5, bp upstream from these sequences. In certain embodiments, a Cas9 molecule of S. mutans recognizes the sequence motif NGG (SEQ ID NO: 2) and/or NAAR (R=A or G) (SEQ ID NO: 6) and directs cleavage of a target nucleic acid sequence 1 to 10, for example, 3 to 5 bp, upstream from this sequence. In certain embodiments, a Cas9 molecule of S. aureus recognizes the sequence motif NNGRR (R=A or G) (SEQ ID NO: 7) and directs cleavage of a target nucleic acid sequence 1 to 10, for example, 3 to 5, bp upstream from that sequence. In certain embodiments, a Cas9 molecule of S. aureus recognizes the sequence motif NNGRRN (R=A or G) (SEQ ID NO: 8) and directs cleavage of a target nucleic acid sequence 1 to 10, for example, 3 to 5, bp upstream from that sequence. In certain embodiments, a Cas9 molecule of S. aureus recognizes the sequence motif NNGRRT (R=A or G) (SEQ ID NO: 9) and directs cleavage of a target nucleic acid sequence 1 to 10, for example, 3 to 5, bp upstream from that sequence. In certain embodiments, a Cas9 molecule of S. aureus recognizes the sequence motif NNGRRV (R=A or G; V=A or C or G) (SEQ ID NO: 10) and directs cleavage of a target nucleic acid sequence 1 to 10, for example, 3 to 5, bp upstream from that sequence. A Cas9 molecule derived from Neisseria meningitidis (NmCas9) normally has a native PAM of NNNNGATT (SEQ ID NO: 11), but may have activity across a variety of PAMs, including a highly degenerate NNNNGNNN PAM (SEQ ID NO: 12) (Esvelt et al. Nature Methods 2013 doi:10.1038/nmeth.2681). In the aforementioned embodiments, N can be any nucleotide residue, for example, any of A, G, C, or T. Cas9 molecules can be engineered to alter the PAM specificity of the Cas9 molecule.

In some embodiments, the Cas9 protein recognizes a PAM sequence NGG (SEQ ID NO: 2) or NGA (SEQ ID NO: 13) or NNNRRT (R=A or G) (SEQ ID NO: 14) or ATTCCT (SEQ ID NO: 15) or NGAN (SEQ ID NO: 16) or NGNG (SEQ ID NO: 17). In some embodiments, the Cas9 protein is a Cas9 protein of S. aureus and recognizes the sequence motif NNGRR (R=A or G) (SEQ ID NO: 7), NNGRRN (R=A or G) (SEQ ID NO: 8), NNGRRT (R=A or G) (SEQ ID NO: 9), or NNGRRV (R=A or G) (V=A or G or C) (SEQ ID NO: 10). In the aforementioned embodiments, N can be any nucleotide residue, for example, any of A, G, C, or T.

Additionally or alternatively, a nucleic acid encoding a Cas9 molecule or Cas9 polypeptide may comprise a nuclear localization sequence (NLS). Nuclear localization sequences are known in the art, for example, SV40 NLS (Pro-Lys-Lys-Lys-Arg-Lys-Val; SEQ ID NO: 70).

In some embodiments, the at least one Cas9 molecule is a mutant Cas9 molecule. The Cas9 protein can be mutated so that the nuclease activity is inactivated. An inactivated Cas9 protein (“iCas9”, also referred to as “dCas9”) with no endonuclease activity has been targeted to genes in bacteria, yeast, and human cells by gRNAs to silence gene expression through steric hindrance. Exemplary mutations with reference to the S. pyogenes Cas9 sequence to inactivate the nuclease activity include D10A, E762A, H840A, N854A, N863A and/or D986A. A S. pyogenes Cas9 protein with the D10A mutation may comprise an amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO: 20. A S. pyogenes Cas9 protein with D10A and H849A mutations may comprise an amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO: 21. Exemplary mutations with reference to the S. aureus Cas9 sequence to inactivate the nuclease activity include D10A and N580A. In certain embodiments, the mutant S. aureus Cas9 molecule comprises a D10A mutation. The nucleotide sequence encoding this mutant S. aureus Cas9 is set forth in SEQ ID NO: 22. In certain embodiments, the mutant S. aureus Cas9 molecule comprises a N580A mutation. The nucleotide sequence encoding this mutant S. aureus Cas9 molecule is set forth in SEQ ID NO: 23.

In some embodiments, the Cas9 protein is a VQR variant. The VQR variant of Cas9 is a mutant with a different PAM recognition, as detailed in Kleinstiver, et al. (Nature 2015, 523, 481-485, incorporated herein by reference).

A polynucleotide encoding a Cas9 molecule can be a synthetic polynucleotide. For example, the synthetic polynucleotide can be chemically modified. The synthetic polynucleotide can be codon optimized, for example, at least one non-common codon or less-common codon has been replaced by a common codon. For example, the synthetic polynucleotide can direct the synthesis of an optimized messenger mRNA, for example, optimized for expression in a mammalian expression system, as described herein. An exemplary codon optimized nucleic acid sequence encoding a Cas9 molecule of S. pyogenes is set forth in SEQ ID NO: 24. Exemplary codon optimized nucleic acid sequences encoding a Cas9 molecule of S. aureus, and optionally containing nuclear localization sequences (NLSs), are set forth in SEQ ID NOs: 25-31. Another exemplary codon optimized nucleic acid sequence encoding a Cas9 molecule of S. aureus comprises the nucleotides 1293-4451 of SEQ ID NO: 32.

b. Cas9 Fusion Protein

Alternatively or additionally, the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system can include a fusion protein. The fusion protein can comprise two heterologous polypeptide domains. The first polypeptide domain comprises a Cas9 protein or a mutated Cas9 protein. The first polypeptide domain is fused to at least one second polypeptide domain. The second polypeptide domain has a different activity that what is endogenous to Cas9 protein. For example, the second polypeptide domain may have an activity such as transcription activation activity, transcription repression activity, transcription release factor activity, histone modification activity, nuclease activity, nucleic acid association activity, methylase activity, demethylase activity, acetylation activity, and/or deacetylation activity. The activity of the second polypeptide domain may be direct or indirect. The second polypeptide domain may have this activity itself (direct), or it may recruit and/or interact with a polypeptide domain that has this activity (indirect). In some embodiments, the second polypeptide domain has transcription activation activity. In some embodiments, the second polypeptide domain has transcription repression activity. In some embodiments, the second polypeptide domain comprises a synthetic transcription factor. The second polypeptide domain may be at the C-terminal end of the first polypeptide domain, or at the N-terminal end of the first polypeptide domain, or a combination thereof. The fusion protein may include one second polypeptide domain. The fusion protein may include two of the second polypeptide domains. For example, the fusion protein may include a second polypeptide domain at the N-terminal end of the first polypeptide domain as well as a second polypeptide domain at the C-terminal end of the first polypeptide domain. In other embodiments, the fusion protein may include a single first polypeptide domain and more than one (for example, two or three) second polypeptide domains in tandem.

The linkage from the first polypeptide domain to the second polypeptide domain can be through reversible or irreversible covalent linkage or through a non-covalent linkage, as long as the linker does not interfere with the function of the second polypeptide domain. For example, a Cas polypeptide can be linked to a second polypeptide domain as part of a fusion protein. As another example, they can be linked through reversible non-covalent interactions such as avidin (or streptavidin)-biotin interaction, histidine-divalent metal ion interaction (such as, Ni, Co, Cu, Fe), interactions between multimerization (such as, dimerization) domains, or glutathione S-transferase (GST)-glutathione interaction. As yet another example, they can be linked covalently but reversibly with linkers such as dibromomaleimide (DBM) or amino-thiol conjugation. In some embodiments, the Cas9 fusion protein includes at least one linker. A linker may be included anywhere in the polypeptide sequence of the Cas9 fusion protein, for example, between the first and second polypeptide domains. A linker may be of any length and design to promote or restrict the mobility of components in the Cas9 fusion protein. A linker may comprise any amino acid sequence of about 2 to about 100, about 5 to about 80, about 10 to about 60, or about 20 to about 50 amino acids. A linker may comprise an amino acid sequence of at least about 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, or 30 amino acids. A linker may comprise an amino acid sequence of less than about 100, 90, 80, 70, 60, 50, or 40 amino acids. A linker may include sequential or tandem repeats of an amino acid sequence that is 2 to 20 amino acids in length.

i) Transcription Activation Activity

The second polypeptide domain can have transcription activation activity, for example, a transactivation domain. For example, gene expression of endogenous mammalian genes, such as human genes, can be achieved by targeting a fusion protein of a first polypeptide domain, such as dCas9, and a transactivation domain to mammalian promoters via combinations of gRNAs. The transactivation domain can include a VP16 protein, multiple VP16 proteins, such as a VP48 domain or VP64 domain, p65 domain of NF kappa B transcription activator activity, TET1, VPR, VPH, Rta, and/or p300. For example, the fusion protein may comprise dCas9-p300. In some embodiments, p300 comprises a polypeptide having the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO: 33 or SEQ ID NO: 34. In other embodiments, the fusion protein comprises dCas9-VP64. In other embodiments, the fusion protein comprises VP64-dCas9-VP64. VP64-dCas9-VP64 may comprise a polypeptide having the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO: 35, encoded by the polynucleotide of SEQ ID NO: 36.

ii) Transcription Repression Activity

The second polypeptide domain can have transcription repression activity. Non-limiting examples of repressors include Kruppel associated box activity such as a KRAB domain or KRAB, MECP2, EED, ERF repressor domain (ERD), Mad mSIN3 interaction domain (SID) or Mad-SID repressor domain, SID4X repressor domain, Mxil repressor domain, SUV39H1, SUV39H2, G9A, ESET/SETBDI, Cir4, Su(var)3-9, Pr-SET7/8, SUV4-20H1, PR-set7, Suv4-20, Set9, EZH2, RIZ1, JMJD2A/JHDM3A, JMJD2B, JMJ2D2C/GASC1, JMJD2D, Rph1, JARID1A/RBP2, JARID1B/PLU-1, JARID1C/SMCX, JARID1D/SMCY, Lid, Jhn2, Jmj2, HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, HDAC8, Rpd3, Hos1, Cir6, HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC7, HDAC9, Hda1, Cir3, SIRT1, SIRT2, Sir2, Hst1, Hst2, Hst3, Hst4, HDAC11, DNMT1, DNMT3a/3b, DNMT3A-3L, MET1, DRM3, ZMET2, CMT1, CMT2, Laminin A, Laminin B, CTCF, and/or a domain having TATA box binding protein activity, or a combination thereof. In some embodiments, the second polypeptide domain has a KRAB domain activity, ERF repressor domain activity, Mxil repressor domain activity, SID4X repressor domain activity, Mad-SID repressor domain activity, DNMT3A or DNMT3L or fusion thereof activity, LSD1 histone demethylase activity, or TATA box binding protein activity. In some embodiments, the polypeptide domain comprises KRAB. For example, the fusion protein may be S. pyogenes dCas9-KRAB (polynucleotide sequence SEQ ID NO: 62; protein sequence SEQ ID NO: 63). The fusion protein may be S. aureus dCas9-KRAB (polynucleotide sequence SEQ ID NO: 64; protein sequence SEQ ID NO: 65).

iii) Transcription Release Factor Activity

The second polypeptide domain can have transcription release factor activity. The second polypeptide domain can have eukaryotic release factor 1 (ERF1) activity or eukaryotic release factor 3 (ERF3) activity.

iv) Histone Modification Activity

The second polypeptide domain can have histone modification activity. The second polypeptide domain can have histone deacetylase, histone acetyltransferase, histone demethylase, or histone methyltransferase activity. The histone acetyltransferase may be p300 or CREB-binding protein (CBP) protein, or fragments thereof. For example, the fusion protein may be dCas9-p300. In some embodiments, p300 comprises a polypeptide of SEQ ID NO: 33 or SEQ ID NO: 34.

v) Nuclease Activity

The second polypeptide domain can have nuclease activity that is different from the nuclease activity of the Cas9 protein. A nuclease, or a protein having nuclease activity, is an enzyme capable of cleaving the phosphodiester bonds between the nucleotide subunits of nucleic acids. Nucleases are usually further divided into endonucleases and exonucleases, although some of the enzymes may fall in both categories. Well known nucleases include deoxyribonuclease and ribonuclease.

vi) Nucleic Acid Association Activity

The second polypeptide domain can have nucleic acid association activity or nucleic acid binding protein-DNA-binding domain (DBD). A DBD is an independently folded protein domain that contains at least one motif that recognizes double- or single-stranded DNA. A DBD can recognize a specific DNA sequence (a recognition sequence) or have a general affinity to DNA. A nucleic acid association region may be selected from helix-turn-helix region, leucine zipper region, winged helix region, winged helix-turn-helix region, helix-loop-helix region, immunoglobulin fold, B3 domain, Zinc finger, HMG-box, Wor3 domain, and TAL effector DNA-binding domain.

vii) Methylase Activity

The second polypeptide domain can have methylase activity, which involves transferring a methyl group to DNA, RNA, protein, small molecule, cytosine, or adenine. In some embodiments, the second polypeptide domain includes a DNA methyltransferase.

viii) Demethylase Activity

The second polypeptide domain can have demethylase activity. The second polypeptide domain can include an enzyme that removes methyl (CH3-) groups from nucleic acids, proteins (in particular histones), and other molecules. Alternatively, the second polypeptide can convert the methyl group to hydroxymethylcytosine in a mechanism for demethylating DNA. The second polypeptide can catalyze this reaction. For example, the second polypeptide that catalyzes this reaction can be Tet1, also known as Tet1CD (Ten-eleven translocation methylcytosine dioxygenase 1; polynucleotide sequence SEQ ID NO: 66; amino acid sequence SEQ ID NO: 67). In some embodiments, the second polypeptide domain has histone demethylase activity. In some embodiments, the second polypeptide domain has DNA demethylase activity.

c. Guide RNA (gRNA)

The CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system includes at least one gRNA molecule. For example, the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system may include two gRNA molecules. The at least one gRNA molecule can bind and recognize a target region. The gRNA provides the targeting of a CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system. The gRNA is a fusion of two noncoding RNAs: a crRNA and a tracrRNA. gRNA mimics the naturally occurring crRNA:tracrRNA duplex involved in the Type II Effector system. This duplex, which may include, for example, a 42-nucleotide crRNA and a 75-nucleotide tracrRNA, acts as a guide for the Cas9 to bind, and in some cases, cleave the target nucleic acid. The gRNA may target any desired DNA sequence by exchanging the sequence encoding a 20 bp protospacer which confers targeting specificity through complementary base pairing with the desired DNA target. The “target region” or “target sequence” or “protospacer” refers to the region of the target gene to which the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system targets and binds. The portion of the gRNA that targets the target sequence in the genome may be referred to as the “targeting sequence” or “targeting portion” or “targeting domain.” “Protospacer” or “gRNA spacer” may refer to the region of the target gene to which the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system targets and binds; “protospacer” or “gRNA spacer” may also refer to the portion of the gRNA that is complementary to the targeted sequence in the genome. The gRNA may include a gRNA scaffold. A gRNA scaffold facilitates Cas9 binding to the gRNA and may facilitate endonuclease activity. The gRNA scaffold is a polynucleotide sequence that follows the portion of the gRNA corresponding to sequence that the gRNA targets. Together, the gRNA targeting portion and gRNA scaffold form one polynucleotide. The constant region of the gRNA may include the sequence of SEQ ID NO: 69 (RNA), which is encoded by a sequence comprising SEQ ID NO: 68 (DNA). The CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system may include at least one gRNA, wherein the gRNAs target different DNA sequences. The target DNA sequences may be overlapping. The gRNA may comprise at its 5′ end the targeting domain that is sufficiently complementary to the target region to be able to hybridize to, for example, about 10 to about 20 nucleotides of the target region of the target gene, when it is followed by an appropriate Protospacer Adjacent Motif (PAM). The target region or protospacer is followed by a PAM sequence at the 3′ end of the protospacer in the genome. Different Type II systems have differing PAM requirements, as detailed above.

The targeting domain of the gRNA does not need to be perfectly complementary to the target region of the target DNA. In some embodiments, the targeting domain of the gRNA is at least 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, or at least 99% complementary to (or has 1, 2 or 3 mismatches compared to) the target region over a length of, such as, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, or 20 nucleotides. For example, the DNA-targeting domain of the gRNA may be at least 80% complementary over at least 18 nucleotides of the target region. The target region may be on either strand of the target DNA.

As described above, the gRNA molecule comprises a targeting domain (also referred to as targeted or targeting sequence), which is a polynucleotide sequence complementary to the target DNA sequence. The gRNA may comprise a “G” at the 5′ end of the targeting domain or complementary polynucleotide sequence. The CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system may use gRNAs of varying sequences and lengths. The targeting domain of a gRNA molecule may comprise at least a 10 base pair, at least a 11 base pair, at least a 12 base pair, at least a 13 base pair, at least a 14 base pair, at least a 15 base pair, at least a 16 base pair, at least a 17 base pair, at least a 18 base pair, at least a 19 base pair, at least a 20 base pair, at least a 21 base pair, at least a 22 base pair, at least a 23 base pair, at least a 24 base pair, at least a 25 base pair, at least a 30 base pair, or at least a 35 base pair complementary polynucleotide sequence of the target DNA sequence followed by a PAM sequence. In certain embodiments, the targeting domain of a gRNA molecule has 19-25 nucleotides in length. In certain embodiments, the targeting domain of a gRNA molecule is 20 nucleotides in length. In certain embodiments, the targeting domain of a gRNA molecule is 21 nucleotides in length. In certain embodiments, the targeting domain of a gRNA molecule is 22 nucleotides in length. In certain embodiments, the targeting domain of a gRNA molecule is 23 nucleotides in length.

The gRNA may target a region within or near an intron or exon of the dystrophin gene. For example, the gRNA may bind and target and/or hybridize to a polynucleotide sequence comprising at least one of SEQ ID NOs: 49-50, or a complement thereof, or a variant thereof, or a truncation thereof (TABLE 2). The gRNA may comprise a polynucleotide sequence selected from SEQ ID NOs: 60-61, or a complement thereof, or a variant thereof, or a truncation thereof. A truncation may be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9 nucleotides shorter than the referenced sequence. SEQ ID NOs: 49 and 60 relate to a gRNA targeting intron 22, for deletion of mouse mdx exon 23. SEQ ID NOs: 50 and 61 related to a gRNA targeting intron 23, for deletion of mouse mdx exon 23.

The number of gRNA molecules that may be included in the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system can be at least 1 gRNA, at least 2 different gRNAs, at least 3 different gRNAs, at least 4 different gRNAs, at least 5 different gRNAs, at least 6 different gRNAs, at least 7 different gRNAs, at least 8 different gRNAs, at least 9 different gRNAs, at least 10 different gRNAs, at least 11 different gRNAs, at least 12 different gRNAs, at least 13 different gRNAs, at least 14 different gRNAs, at least 15 different gRNAs, at least 16 different gRNAs, at least 17 different gRNAs, at least 18 different gRNAs, at least 18 different gRNAs, at least 20 different gRNAs, at least 25 different gRNAs, at least 30 different gRNAs, at least 35 different gRNAs, at least 40 different gRNAs, at least 45 different gRNAs, or at least 50 different gRNAs. The number of gRNA molecules that may be included in the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system can be less than 50 different gRNAs, less than 45 different gRNAs, less than 40 different gRNAs, less than 35 different gRNAs, less than 30 different gRNAs, less than 25 different gRNAs, less than 20 different gRNAs, less than 19 different gRNAs, less than 18 different gRNAs, less than 17 different gRNAs, less than 16 different gRNAs, less than 15 different gRNAs, less than 14 different gRNAs, less than 13 different gRNAs, less than 12 different gRNAs, less than 11 different gRNAs, less than 10 different gRNAs, less than 9 different gRNAs, less than 8 different gRNAs, less than 7 different gRNAs, less than 6 different gRNAs, less than 5 different gRNAs, less than 4 different gRNAs, less than 3 different gRNAs, or less than 2 different gRNAs. The number of gRNAs that may be included in the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system can be between at least 1 gRNA to at least 50 different gRNAs, at least 1 gRNA to at least 45 different gRNAs, at least 1 gRNA to at least 40 different gRNAs, at least 1 gRNA to at least 35 different gRNAs, at least 1 gRNA to at least 30 different gRNAs, at least 1 gRNA to at least 25 different gRNAs, at least 1 gRNA to at least 20 different gRNAs, at least 1 gRNA to at least 16 different gRNAs, at least 1 gRNA to at least 12 different gRNAs, at least 1 gRNA to at least 8 different gRNAs, at least 1 gRNA to at least 4 different gRNAs, at least 4 gRNAs to at least 50 different gRNAs, at least 4 different gRNAs to at least 45 different gRNAs, at least 4 different gRNAs to at least 40 different gRNAs, at least 4 different gRNAs to at least 35 different gRNAs, at least 4 different gRNAs to at least 30 different gRNAs, at least 4 different gRNAs to at least 25 different gRNAs, at least 4 different gRNAs to at least 20 different gRNAs, at least 4 different gRNAs to at least 16 different gRNAs, at least 4 different gRNAs to at least 12 different gRNAs, at least 4 different gRNAs to at least 8 different gRNAs, at least 8 different gRNAs to at least 50 different gRNAs, at least 8 different gRNAs to at least 45 different gRNAs, at least 8 different gRNAs to at least 40 different gRNAs, at least 8 different gRNAs to at least 35 different gRNAs, 8 different gRNAs to at least 30 different gRNAs, at least 8 different gRNAs to at least 25 different gRNAs, 8 different gRNAs to at least 20 different gRNAs, at least 8 different gRNAs to at least 16 different gRNAs, or 8 different gRNAs to at least 12 different gRNAs.

d. Donor Sequence

In some embodiments, the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system may include at least one donor sequence. A donor sequence comprises a polynucleotide sequence to be inserted into a genome. A donor sequence may comprise a wild-type sequence of a gene. For example, a donor sequence may include a wild-type exon or more than one wild-type exon of the dystrophin gene.

The gRNA and donor sequence may be present in a variety of molar ratios. The molar ratio between the gRNA and donor sequence may be 1:1, or 1:15, or from 5:1 to 1:10, or from 1:1 to 1:5. The molar ratio between the gRNA and donor sequence may be at least 1:1, at least 1:2, at least 1:3, at least 1:4, at least 1:5, at least 1:6, at least 1:7, at least 1:8, at least 1:9, at least 1:10, at least 1:15, or at least 1:20. The molar ratio between the gRNA and donor sequence may be less than 20:1, less than 15:1, less than 10:1, less than 9:1, less than 8:1, less than 7:1, less than 6:1, less than 5:1, less than 4:1, less than 3:1, less than 2:1, or less than 1:1.

e. Repair Pathways

The CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system may be used to introduce site-specific double strand breaks at targeted genomic loci, such as a site within or near the dystrophin gene. Site-specific double-strand breaks are created when the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system binds to a target DNA sequences, thereby permitting cleavage of the target DNA. This DNA cleavage may stimulate the natural DNA-repair machinery, leading to one of two possible repair pathways: homology-directed repair (HDR) or the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway.

i) Homology-Directed Repair (HDR)

Restoration of protein expression from a gene may involve homology-directed repair (HDR). A donor template may be administered to a cell. The donor template may include a nucleotide sequence encoding a full-functional protein or a partially functional protein. In such embodiments, the donor template may include fully functional gene construct for restoring a mutant gene, or a fragment of the gene that after homology-directed repair, leads to restoration of the mutant gene. In other embodiments, the donor template may include a nucleotide sequence encoding a mutated version of an inhibitory regulatory element of a gene. Mutations may include, for example, nucleotide substitutions, insertions, deletions, or a combination thereof. In such embodiments, introduced mutation(s) into the inhibitory regulatory element of the gene may reduce the transcription of or binding to the inhibitory regulatory element.

ii) NHEJ

Restoration of protein expression from gene may be through template-free NHEJ-mediated DNA repair. In certain embodiments, NHEJ is a nuclease mediated NHEJ, which in certain embodiments, refers to NHEJ that is initiated a Cas9 molecule that cuts double stranded DNA. The method comprises administering a presently disclosed CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system or a composition comprising thereof to a subject for gene editing.

Nuclease mediated NHEJ may correct a mutated target gene and offer several potential advantages over the HDR pathway. For example, NHEJ does not require a donor template, which may cause nonspecific insertional mutagenesis. In contrast to HDR, NHEJ operates efficiently in all stages of the cell cycle and therefore may be effectively exploited in both cycling and post-mitotic cells, such as muscle fibers. This provides a robust, permanent gene restoration alternative to oligonucleotide-based exon skipping or pharmacologic forced read-through of stop codons and could theoretically require as few as one drug treatment.

### 4. Genetic Constructs

The CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system may be encoded by or comprised within a genetic construct. The genetic construct, such as a plasmid or expression vector, may comprise a nucleic acid that encodes the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system and/or at least one of the gRNAs. In certain embodiments, a genetic construct encodes one gRNA molecule, i.e., a first gRNA molecule, and optionally a Cas9 molecule or fusion protein. In some embodiments, a genetic construct encodes two gRNA molecules, i.e., a first gRNA molecule and a second gRNA molecule, and optionally a Cas9 molecule or fusion protein. In some embodiments, a first genetic construct encodes one gRNA molecule, i.e., a first gRNA molecule, and optionally a Cas9 molecule or fusion protein, and a second genetic construct encodes one gRNA molecule, i.e., a second gRNA molecule, and optionally a Cas9 molecule or fusion protein.

Genetic constructs may include polynucleotides such as vectors and plasmids. The genetic construct may be a linear minichromosome including centromere, telomeres, or plasmids or cosmids. The vector may be an expression vectors or system to produce protein by routine techniques and readily available starting materials including Sambrook et al., Molecular Cloning and Laboratory Manual, Second Ed., Cold Spring Harbor (1989), which is incorporated fully by reference. The construct may be recombinant. The genetic construct may be part of a genome of a recombinant viral vector, including recombinant lentivirus, recombinant adenovirus, and recombinant adenovirus associated virus. The genetic construct may comprise regulatory elements for gene expression of the coding sequences of the nucleic acid. The regulatory elements may be a promoter, an enhancer, an initiation codon, a stop codon, or a polyadenylation signal.

The genetic construct may comprise heterologous nucleic acid encoding the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system and may further comprise an initiation codon, which may be upstream of the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system coding sequence. The CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system may comprise a stop codon, which may be downstream of the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system coding sequence. The initiation and termination codon may be in frame with the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system coding sequence.

The vector may also comprise a promoter that is operably linked to the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system coding sequence. The promoter may be a constitutive promoter, an inducible promoter, a repressible promoter, or a regulatable promoter. The promoter may be a ubiquitous promoter. The CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system may be under the light-inducible or chemically inducible control to enable the dynamic control of gene/genome editing in space and time. The promoter operably linked to the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system coding sequence may be a promoter from simian virus 40 (SV40), a mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter, a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) promoter such as the bovine immunodeficiency virus (BIV) long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter, a Moloney virus promoter, an avian leukosis virus (ALV) promoter, a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter such as the CMV immediate early promoter, Epstein Barr virus (EBV) promoter, or a Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) promoter. In some embodiments, the promoter is a CMV promoter. The promoter may also be a promoter from a human gene such as human ubiquitin C (hUbC), human actin, human myosin, human hemoglobin, human muscle creatine, or human metallothionein. The promoter may be a tissue specific promoter. A tissue specific promoter is a promoter that has activity in only certain cell types. Examples of a tissue specific promoter, such as a muscle or skin specific promoter, natural or synthetic, are described in U.S. Patent Application Publication No. US20040175727, the contents of which are incorporated herein in its entirety. The tissue specific promoter may be a muscle specific promoter. The promoter may be a CK8 promoter, a Spc512 promoter, a MHCK7 promoter, for example. Promoters that target muscle-specific stem cells may include the CK8 promoter, the Spc5-12 promoter, and the MHCK7 promoter. The CK8 promoter may comprise the polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO: 51. The Spc5-12 promoter may comprise the polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO: 52. The MHCK7 promoter may comprise the polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO: 53.

The genetic construct may also comprise a polyadenylation signal, which may be downstream of the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system. The polyadenylation signal may be a SV40 polyadenylation signal, LTR polyadenylation signal, bovine growth hormone (bGH) polyadenylation signal, human growth hormone (hGH) polyadenylation signal, or human β-globin polyadenylation signal. The SV40 polyadenylation signal may be a polyadenylation signal from a pCEP4 vector (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA).

Coding sequences in the genetic construct may be optimized for stability and high levels of expression. In some instances, codons are selected to reduce secondary structure formation of the RNA such as that formed due to intramolecular bonding.

The genetic construct may also comprise an enhancer upstream of the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system or gRNAs. The enhancer may be necessary for DNA expression. The enhancer may be human actin, human myosin, human hemoglobin, human muscle creatine or a viral enhancer such as one from CMV, HA, RSV, or EBV. Polynucleotide function enhancers are described in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,593,972, 5,962,428, and WO94/016737, the contents of each are fully incorporated by reference. The genetic construct may also comprise a mammalian origin of replication in order to maintain the vector extrachromosomally and produce multiple copies of the vector in a cell. The genetic construct may also comprise a regulatory sequence, which may be well suited for gene expression in a mammalian or human cell into which the vector is administered. The genetic construct may also comprise a reporter gene, such as green fluorescent protein (“GFP”) and/or a selectable marker, such as hygromycin (“Hygro”).

The genetic construct may be useful for transfecting cells with nucleic acid encoding the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system, which the transformed host cell is cultured and maintained under conditions wherein expression of the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system takes place. The genetic construct may be transformed or transduced into a cell. The genetic construct may be formulated into any suitable type of delivery vehicle including, for example, a viral vector, lentiviral expression, mRNA electroporation, and lipid-mediated transfection for delivery into a cell. The genetic construct may be part of the genetic material in attenuated live microorganisms or recombinant microbial vectors which live in cells. The genetic construct may be present in the cell as a functioning extrachromosomal molecule.

Further provided herein is a cell transformed or transduced with a system or component thereof as detailed herein. Suitable cell types are detailed herein. In some embodiments, the cell is a stem cell. The stem cell may be a human stem cell. In some embodiments, the cell is an embryonic stem cell. The stem cell may be a human pluripotent stem cell (iPSCs). The cell may be a muscle cell. The cell may be a satellite cell. Further provided are stem cell-derived neurons, such as neurons derived from iPSCs transformed or transduced with a DNA targeting system or component thereof as detailed herein.

a. Viral Vectors

A genetic construct may be a viral vector. Further provided herein is a viral delivery system. Viral delivery systems may include, for example, lentivirus, retrovirus, adenovirus, mRNA electroporation, or nanoparticles. In some embodiments, the vector is a modified lentiviral vector. In some embodiments, the viral vector is an adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector. The AAV vector is a small virus belonging to the genus Dependovirus of the Parvoviridae family that infects humans and some other primate species. The AAV vector may be, for example, AAV1, AAV2, AAV3, AAV4, AAV5, AAV6, AAV6.2, AAV7, AAV8, AAV9, AAV10, AAV11, AAV12, AAVrh74, Rh74, or Rh10, or a hybrid or chimera thereof. In some embodiments, the AAV vector is an AAV9, AAV6.2, AAV8, AAV1, AAV2, or AAV5 vector.

AAV vectors may be used to deliver CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing systems using various construct configurations. For example, AAV vectors may deliver Cas9 or fusion protein and gRNA expression cassettes on separate vectors or on the same vector. Alternatively, if the small Cas9 proteins or fusion proteins, derived from species such as Staphylococcus aureus or Neisseria meningitidis, are used then both the Cas9 and up to two gRNA expression cassettes may be combined in a single AAV vector. In some embodiments, the AAV vector has a 4.7 kb packaging limit.

In some embodiments, the AAV vector is a modified AAV vector. The modified AAV vector may have enhanced cardiac and/or skeletal muscle tissue tropism. Tissue tropism describes cells and/or tissues of a host that support growth of a particular virus or bacterium. For example, some viruses have a broad tissue tropism and can infect many types of cells and tissues. Other viruses may infect primarily a single tissue. In some embodiments, the vector has tropism for muscle satellite cells. The modified AAV vector may be capable of delivering and expressing the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system in the cell of a mammal. For example, the modified AAV vector may be an AAV-SASTG vector (Piacentino et al. Human Gene Therapy 2012, 23, 635-646). The modified AAV vector may be based on one or more of several capsid types, including AAV1, AAV2, AAV5, AAV6, AAV8, and AAV9. The modified AAV vector may be based on AAV2 pseudotype with alternative muscle-tropic AAV capsids, such as AAV2/1, AAV2/6, AAV2/7, AAV2/8, AAV2/9, AAV2.5, and AAV/SASTG vectors that efficiently transduce skeletal muscle or cardiac muscle by systemic and local delivery (Seto et al. Current Gene Therapy 2012, 12, 139-151). The modified AAV vector may be AAV2i8G9 (Shen et al. J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288, 28814-28823).

The genetic construct may comprise a polynucleotide sequence selected from SEQ ID NOs: 54-59. The genetic construct may comprise a polynucleotide sequence of at least one of SEQ ID NOs: 54-59.

### 5. Pharmaceutical Compositions

Further provided herein are pharmaceutical compositions comprising the above-described genetic constructs or gene editing systems. In some embodiments, the pharmaceutical composition may comprise about 1 ng to about 10 mg of DNA encoding the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system. The systems or genetic constructs as detailed herein, or at least one component thereof, may be formulated into pharmaceutical compositions in accordance with standard techniques well known to those skilled in the pharmaceutical art. The pharmaceutical compositions can be formulated according to the mode of administration to be used. In cases where pharmaceutical compositions are injectable pharmaceutical compositions, they are sterile, pyrogen free, and particulate free. An isotonic formulation is preferably used. Generally, additives for isotonicity may include sodium chloride, dextrose, mannitol, sorbitol and lactose. In some cases, isotonic solutions such as phosphate buffered saline are preferred. Stabilizers include gelatin and albumin. In some embodiments, a vasoconstriction agent is added to the formulation.

The composition may further comprise a pharmaceutically acceptable excipient. The pharmaceutically acceptable excipient may be functional molecules as vehicles, adjuvants, carriers, or diluents. The term “pharmaceutically acceptable carrier,” may be a non-toxic, inert solid, semi-solid or liquid filler, diluent, encapsulating material or formulation auxiliary of any type. Pharmaceutically acceptable carriers include, for example, diluents, lubricants, binders, disintegrants, colorants, flavors, sweeteners, antioxidants, preservatives, glidants, solvents, suspending agents, wetting agents, surfactants, emollients, propellants, humectants, powders, pH adjusting agents, and combinations thereof. The pharmaceutically acceptable excipient may be a transfection facilitating agent, which may include surface active agents, such as immune-stimulating complexes (ISCOMS), Freunds incomplete adjuvant, LPS analog including monophosphoryl lipid A, muramyl peptides, quinone analogs, vesicles such as squalene and squalene, hyaluronic acid, lipids, liposomes, calcium ions, viral proteins, polyanions, polycations, or nanoparticles, or other known transfection facilitating agents. The transfection facilitating agent may be a polyanion, polycation, including poly-L-glutamate (LGS), or lipid. The transfection facilitating agent may be poly-L-glutamate, and more preferably, the poly-L-glutamate may be present in the composition for gene editing in skeletal muscle or cardiac muscle at a concentration less than 6 mg/mL.

### 6. Administration

The systems or genetic constructs as detailed herein, or at least one component thereof, may be administered or delivered to a cell. Methods of introducing a nucleic acid into a host cell are known in the art, and any known method can be used to introduce a nucleic acid (e.g., an expression construct) into a cell. Suitable methods include, for example, viral or bacteriophage infection, transfection, conjugation, protoplast fusion, polycation or lipid:nucleic acid conjugates, lipofection, electroporation, nucleofection, immunoliposomes, calcium phosphate precipitation, polyethyleneimine (PEI)-mediated transfection, DEAE-dextran mediated transfection, liposome-mediated transfection, particle gun technology, calcium phosphate precipitation, direct micro injection, nanoparticle-mediated nucleic acid delivery, and the like. In some embodiments, the composition may be delivered by mRNA delivery and ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex delivery. The system, genetic construct, or composition comprising the same, may be electroporated using BioRad Gene Pulser Xcell or Amaxa Nucleofector IIb devices or other electroporation device. Several different buffers may be used, including BioRad electroporation solution, Sigma phosphate-buffered saline product #D8537 (PBS), Invitrogen OptiMEM I (OM), or Amaxa Nucleofector solution V (N.V.). Transfections may include a transfection reagent, such as Lipofectamine 2000.

The systems or genetic constructs as detailed herein, or at least one component thereof, or the pharmaceutical compositions comprising the same, may be administered to a subject. Such compositions can be administered in dosages and by techniques well known to those skilled in the medical arts taking into consideration such factors as the age, sex, weight, and condition of the particular subject, and the route of administration. The presently disclosed systems, or at least one component thereof, genetic constructs, or compositions comprising the same, may be administered to a subject by different routes including orally, parenterally, sublingually, transdermally, rectally, transmucosally, topically, intranasal, intravaginal, via inhalation, via buccal administration, intrapleurally, intravenous, intraarterial, intraperitoneal, subcutaneous, intradermally, epidermally, intramuscular, intranasal, intrathecal, intracranial, and intraarticular or combinations thereof. In certain embodiments, the system, genetic construct, or composition comprising the same, is administered to a subject intramuscularly, intravenously, or a combination thereof. The systems, genetic constructs, or compositions comprising the same may be delivered to a subject by several technologies including DNA injection (also referred to as DNA vaccination) with and without in vivo electroporation, liposome mediated, nanoparticle facilitated, recombinant vectors such as recombinant lentivirus, recombinant adenovirus, and recombinant adenovirus associated virus. The composition may be injected into the brain or other component of the central nervous system. The composition may be injected into the skeletal muscle or cardiac muscle. For example, the composition may be injected into the tibialis anterior muscle or tail. For veterinary use, the systems, genetic constructs, or compositions comprising the same may be administered as a suitably acceptable formulation in accordance with normal veterinary practice. The veterinarian may readily determine the dosing regimen and route of administration that is most appropriate for a particular animal. The systems, genetic constructs, or compositions comprising the same may be administered by traditional syringes, needleless injection devices, “microprojectile bombardment gone guns,” or other physical methods such as electroporation (“EP”), “hydrodynamic method”, or ultrasound. Alternatively, transient in vivo delivery of CRISPR/Cas-based systems by non-viral or non-integrating viral gene transfer, or by direct delivery of purified proteins and gRNAs containing cell-penetrating motifs may enable highly specific correction and/or restoration in situ with minimal or no risk of exogenous DNA integration.

Upon delivery of the presently disclosed systems or genetic constructs as detailed herein, or at least one component thereof, or the pharmaceutical compositions comprising the same, and thereupon the vector into the cells of the subject, the transfected cells may express the gRNA molecule(s) and the Cas9 molecule or fusion protein.

a. Cell Types

Any of the delivery methods and/or routes of administration detailed herein can be utilized with a myriad of cell types, for example, those cell types currently under investigation for cell-based therapies, including, but not limited to, immortalized myoblast cells, such as wild-type and DMD patient derived lines, primal DMD dermal fibroblasts, stem cells such as induced pluripotent stem cells, bone marrow-derived progenitors, skeletal muscle progenitors, human skeletal myoblasts from DMD patients, CD 133+ cells, mesoangioblasts, cardiomyocytes, hepatocytes, chondrocytes, mesenchymal progenitor cells, hematopoietic stem cells, muscle cells, smooth muscle cells, and MyoD- or Pax7-transduced cells, or other myogenic progenitor cells. Immortalization of human myogenic cells can be used for clonal derivation of genetically corrected myogenic cells. Cells can be modified ex vivo to isolate and expand clonal populations of immortalized DMD myoblasts that include a genetically corrected or restored dystrophin gene and are free of other nuclease-introduced mutations in protein coding regions of the genome. Further provided herein is a cell transformed or transduced with a system or component thereof as detailed herein. For example, provided herein is a cell comprising an isolated polynucleotide encoding a CRISPR/Cas9 system as detailed herein.

### 7. Kits

Provided herein is a kit, which may be used to restore function of a dystrophin gene and/or direct expression of a CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing system, or a component thereof, to a muscle cell or a satellite cell. The kit may comprise genetic constructs or a composition comprising the same, for restoring function of a dystrophin gene or directing expression to a muscle cell or satellite cell, as described above. In some embodiments, the kit further comprises instructions for using the CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system.

Instructions included in kits may be affixed to packaging material or may be included as a package insert. While the instructions are typically written on printed materials they are not limited to such. Any medium capable of storing such instructions and communicating them to an end user is contemplated by this disclosure. Such media include, but are not limited to, electronic storage media (for example, magnetic discs, tapes, cartridges, chips), optical media (for example, CD ROM), and the like. As used herein, the term “instructions” may include the address of an internet site that provides the instructions.

The genetic constructs or a composition comprising the same for targeting muscle-specific stem cells or satellite cells may include a modified AAV vector that includes a gRNA molecule(s) and a Cas9 protein or fusion protein, as described above, that specifically binds and cleaves a region of the dystrophin gene. The CRISPR/Cas-based gene editing system, as described above, may be included in the kit to specifically bind and target a particular region in a mutant dystrophin gene.

### 8. Methods

a. Methods of Treatment

Provided herein are methods of correcting a mutant gene in a cell, the method comprising administering to a cell the composition described herein. The methods may include correcting a mutant dystrophin gene comprising administering to a subject a genome editing composition comprising the vector compositions described herein. The genome editing composition can be administered to the subject intramuscularly, intravenously, or a combination thereof. Provided herein are also methods of treating a subject suffering from DMD muscular dystrophy. The methods may include administering to the subject the compositions disclosed herein.

## 9. EXAMPLES

The foregoing may be better understood by reference to the following examples, which are presented for purposes of illustration and are not intended to limit the scope of the invention. The present disclosure has multiple aspects and embodiments, illustrated by the appended non-limiting examples.

### Example 1

**Materials and Methods**

Plasmid design and AAV production. CMV-driven Cre recombinase-containing AAV constructs were purchased from the Penn Vector Core. The CMV-Cre plasmid was also purchased from the Penn Vector Core and used to generate CK8e-Cre, SPc5-12-Cre, and MHCK7-Cre AAV transfer plasmids. For CRISPR experiments, an AAV transfer plasmid containing CMV-SaCas9-3×HA-bGHpA was acquired from Addgene (plasmid #61592). CMV was removed and muscle-specific promoters were cloned into this plasmid to generate CK8e-, SPc5-12-, and MHCK7-driven SaCas9 transfer plasmids. AAV transfer plasmid containing two gRNA expression cassettes for mouse exon 23 excision driven by the human U6 promoters were used to prepare recombinant AAV. Intact ITRs were confirmed by SmaI digestion before AAV production on all vectors. Multiple batches of AAV were produced and titers measured by qRT-PCR with a plasmid standard curve to ensure equal dosage within studies.

Animals. The mouse strains C57BL/10ScSn-Dmdmdx/J (mdx) and B6.Cg-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm9(CAG-tdTomato)Hze/J (Ai9) were obtained from Jackson Laboratory. Pax7-nGFP mice were generated by knocking in a nuclear-GFP signal into the first exon of the endogenous Pax7 and were kindly provided by S. Tajbakhsh (Institut Pasteur). NOD.SCID.gamma mice were obtained from the Duke CCIF Breeding Core. Pax7nGFP(+/−); Ai9(+/−); mdx(+/0) males were used for the Cre studies. All experiments involving animals were conducted with strict adherence to the guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals of the National Institute of Health (NIH). All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Duke University.

In vivo AAV administration. All mice used for these studies were males injected at 6-8 weeks of age. For comparison of AAV1, 2, 5, 6.2, 8, and 9 in Cre-mediated recombination of satellite cells, Pax7nGFP; Ai9; mdx mice were administered locally into the TA muscle with 40 μL of 4.72E+11 vg or systemically via tail vein injection with 200 μL of 2E+12 vg. At 8 weeks post injection, mice were euthanized and muscle was collected for analysis by flow cytometry and immunofluorescence staining.

For comparison of Cre-mediated recombination of satellite cells between constitutive and muscle specific promoters, Pax7nGFP; Ai9; mdx were administered locally into the TA muscle with 40 μL of 4.00E+10 vg of AAV9 CMV-, CK8e-, SPc5-12-, or MHCK7-driven Cre.

For AAV9-CRISPR experiments, mice were injected locally with 7E+11-1E+12 vg per vector.

For serial injury experiments, mdx mice were injected with 1E+12 vg per vector of AAV9-CRISPR constructs into the TA muscle. 4 weeks after injection, the TA was subjected to injury with 50 μL of BaCl2. The muscle was allowed to recover for 2 weeks before subsequent additional BaCl2 injuries. Muscle was harvested 2 weeks after the last BaCl2 injury.

AAV-CRISPR cell transplantation experiments. For engraftment experiments, Pax7nGFP; mdx mice were injected with a total of 2E+12 vg per CRISPR vector into the hindlimb (TA, gastrocnemius, and quadricep muscles were injected). Control Pax7nGFP; mdx mice were injected with PBS. 8 weeks later, the injected hindlimb was collected and satellite cells were isolated via enzymatic digestion and sorting. 20-40k satellite cells were isolated per mouse and cells were spun down and resuspended in 15 μL Hank's balanced salt solution supplemented with 10 ng/mL of bFGF.

Two days prior to intramuscular cell transplantation, recipient mdx mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and one hind limb received an 18 Gy dose of irradiation using an X-RAD 320 Biological Irradiator. One day prior to transplantation, mice began an immunosuppression regimen with daily I.P. injections of tacrolimus (Prograf, 5 mg/kg). Satellite cells sorted from Pax7-nGFP mice treated with AAV9-CRISPR or PBS 8 weeks prior were injected into the TA muscle of recipient mdx mice. Four weeks after transplantation, mice were euthanized and the TA muscles were harvested for genomic DNA extraction and a portion of tissue was embedded for sectioning and staining for dystrophin expression.

Satellite cell isolation. For local intramuscular studies, the muscle was harvested and cut into small pieces. Muscle was enzymatically digested with 0.2% Collagenase II (Invitrogen, 17101-015) in DMEM (Invitrogen) for 1 hour, followed by a 30 minute digest with 0.2% Dispase (Invitrogen, 17105-041). Cells were strained through a 30 μm filter and sorted by GFP expression on a SONY SH800 flow cytometer. Cells were collected by centrifugation and genomic DNA was isolated immediately by phenol-chloroform extraction.

Genomic DNA analysis. Genomic DNA from mouse muscle was extracted with the DNeasy kit (Qiagen). Exon 23 deletion was assessed. Tn5-mediated target enrichment and sequencing was performed using the Nextera DNA flex library prep kit (Illumina). TABLE 1 lists the oligonucleotide sequences used in this study.

Histology and Immunofluorescence. Harvested muscles were mounted and frozen in Optimal Cutting Temperature (OCT) compound cooled in liquid nitrogen. Serial 10 μm cryosections were collected. Cryosections were fixed with 2% PFA for 5 min and permeabilized with PBS+0.2% Triton-X for 10 minutes. Blocking buffer (PBS supplemented with 5% goat serum, 2% BSA, M.O.M. blocking reagent, and 0.1% Triton X-100) was applied for 1 hr at room temperature. Samples were incubated overnight at 4° C. with a combination of the following antibodies: Pax7 (1:5, DSHB), MANDYS8 (1:200, Sigma D8168), Laminin (1:200, Sigma L9393), RFP (1:1000, Rockland 600-401-379). Samples were washed with PBS for 15 min and incubated with compatible secondary antibodies diluted 1:500 from Invitrogen and DAPI for 1 hr at room temperature. Samples were washed for 15 min with PBS and slides were mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade Reagent (Invitrogen) and imaged using conventional fluorescence microscopy. 60×images were taken with a confocal microscope.

Western blots. Muscle biopsies were disrupted with a BioMasher (Takara) in RIPA buffer (Sigma) with a proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and incubated for 30 min on ice with intermittent vortexing. Samples were centrifuged at 16000×g for 30 min at 4° C. and the supernatant was isolated and quantified with a bicinchronic acid assay (Pierce). Protein isolate was mixed with in NuPAGE loading buffer (Invitrogen) and 10% p-mercaptoethanol and boiled at 100° C. for 10 min. Samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for future analysis. 25 μg total protein per lane were loaded into 4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen) with MOPS buffer (Invitrogen) and electrophoresed for 45 min at 200 V. Protein was transferred to nitrocellulose membranes for 1 hour in 1× tris-glycine transfer buffer containing 10% methanol and 0.01% SDS at 4° C. at 400 mA. The blot was blocked in 5% milk-TBST and probed with anti-HA (1:1000, Biolegend 901502), MANDYS8 (1:200, Sigma D8168), and GAPDH (1:5000, Cell Signaling 2118S) overnight in 5% milk-TBST at 4° C. Blots were then incubated with mouse or rabbit horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Santa Cruz) for 1 hour in 5% milk-TBST. Blots were visualized using Western-C ECL substrate (Biorad) on a ChemiDoc chemiluminescent system (Biorad).

### Example 2

**Profiling AAV Serotypes for Targeting Efficiency of Satellite Cells**

The Ai9 mouse allele harbors a CAG-loxP-STOP-loxP-tdTomato expression cassette at the Rosa26 locus (Madisen, L. et al. Nat. Neurosci. 2010, 13, 133-140). Excision of the stop cassette by the Cre recombinase leads to permanent labeling of target cells with expression of the tdTomato fluorescent protein. We crossed the Ai9 mice to the Pax7-nGFP mice, in which a nuclear-localized GFP is knocked into the first exon of Pax7 to specifically label satellite cells (Sambasivan, R. et al. Developmental Biology 2012, 381, 241-255). By delivering the Cre recombinase via an AAV vector, tdTomato expression labels cells transduced by the AAV (FIG. 1A). Therefore, any GFP+ cells that co-express tdTomato represent satellite cells that were transduced with the AAV vector (FIG. 1B). We injected AAV1, AAV2, AAV5, AAV6.2 (AAV6 with a point mutation increasing transduction efficiency (Limberis, M. P., et al. Molecular therapy: the journal of the American Society of Gene Therapy 2009, 17, 294-301), AAV8, and AAV9 serotypes encoding CMV-Cre into the tibialis anterior (TA) muscles of Pax7nGFP; Ai9; mdx mice at equivalent doses of 4.72E+11 vg. Muscles were harvested 8 weeks after injection, and the tissue was dissociated to single cells for immediate analysis by flow cytometry. We found that AAV9, AAV6.2, and AAV8 marked the Pax7-nGFP+ cells most efficiently, leading to tdTomato expression in ˜60% of nGFP+ cells (FIG. 1C). We then assessed the top four performing AAV serotypes by systemic administration via tail vein injection at equivalent doses of 2E+12 vg. We harvested various skeletal muscle types and found that following systemic injection, AAV8 and AAV9 clearly outperformed AAV6.2 and AAV1. AAV9 demonstrated significant targeting of Pax7-GFP+ cells, ranging from 20-30% for various muscle types (FIG. 1D). Correct co-localization of tdTomato and Pax7 in vivo was confirmed by immunofluorescence staining of tissue sections (FIG. 1E). We demonstrate that AAV can efficiently transduce satellite cells in vivo using a sensitive Cre/lox-based dual-reporter mouse. We test a series of commonly used AAV serotypes which exhibit unique tissue tropism to conclude that AAV9 and AAV8 are most suitable for satellite cell transduction in both local injections as well as systemic tail vein injections

Because satellite cells are activated and proliferative in dystrophic muscle relative to normal tissues, we also injected AAV9-Cre systemically in Pax7nGFP; Ai9; WT mice to investigate the role of the dystrophic environment on AAV transduction of satellite cells. Interestingly, we found significantly different transduction efficiencies of satellite cells in mdx vs. wild type mice for all muscle tissues tested except diaphragm (FIG. 1F), perhaps related to the activated state of satellite cells in regenerating dystrophic muscle. We found higher AAV9 transduction in mdx mice compared to wild-type mice.

### Example 3

**AAV9-CRISPR Constructs Target Satellite Cells for Gene Editing In Vivo**

Next, we used the Pax7nGFP; mdx mouse to assess the level of gene editing in satellite cells with a dual AAV9-CRISPR strategy consisting of one AAV9 vector encoding Cas9 from Staphylococcus aureus (SaCas9) and the other AAV9 vector encoding two guide RNAs (gRNAs) designed to excise exon 23 from the Dmd gene in mdx mice (FIG. 2A). The SaCas9 and gRNA AAV vectors were premixed in equivalent viral titers of 1E+12 vg/vector and injected into the TA muscle. Control mice received injection of an equal volume of PBS to the TA. At 8 weeks after injection, muscle was harvested for enzymatic dissociation and satellite cell sorting. Genomic DNA was isolated from sorted cells and PCR across exon 23 presented a smaller deletion band in satellite cells isolated from CRISPR-treated muscle (FIG. 2B). Systemic delivery of AAV9-CRISPR at 5E+12 vg/vector was also performed and satellite cells were isolated from hind-limb muscles and diaphragm 8 weeks after treatment. A deletion band could also be detected from satellite cells after systemic intravenous delivery in the majority of samples (FIG. 2C). Sanger sequencing of the gel-extracted deletion band confirms exon 23 deletion (FIG. 2D).

To quantify the level of gene-editing in satellite cells, we adapted a Tn5 transposon-based DNA tagmentation protocol for unbiased sequencing. Using this method, we quantified gene-editing outcomes including exon deletion, indels at either gRNA target site, inversions, and AAV integration in satellite cells 8 weeks after intramuscular injection of AAV9-CRISPR (FIG. 2E). The various editing outcomes ranged from ˜0.01-1% in satellite cells, with indels at single gRNA sites being the most common outcome. We also applied this method to cDNA from these cells to quantify the level of exon 23 deletion in dystrophin transcripts, which ranged from ˜0.4% to 1% (FIG. 2F). These editing frequencies in satellite cells are ˜10-fold lower than what we previously reported in the treated bulk muscle tissue (Nelson, C. E. et al. Nat. Med. 2019, 25, 427-432) and similarly observed here (FIG. 6A and FIG. 6B).

We demonstrate that CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing occurs in the satellite cell population in vivo, and we quantied the level of gene editing outcomes, which revealed significantly less gene editing in the satellite cell population compared to bulk muscle.

### Example 4

**Muscle-Specific Promoters are Active in Satellite Cells**

Next, we sought to define the recombination efficiency in satellite cells when Cre is driven by muscle-specific promoters as opposed to a constitutive CMV promoter. Because many commonly used AAV vectors display broad tissue tropism, clinical trials are moving forward with tissue-specific promoters when available to avoid off-target expression of transgenes. CMV-driven Cas9 expression has been shown to elicit an immune response in adult mice and can cause gene editing in non-muscle tissue. Restricting Cas9 expression to muscle can reduce the risk of off-target genome editing effects and could minimize the elicitation of an immune response. Although muscle-specific promoters are designed to target skeletal and heart muscle efficiently, the extent of expression in satellite cells is presumed to be inefficient. To determine the efficiency of gene expression in satellite cells with our dual reporter system, we delivered 4E+10 vg of AAV9 encoding the ubiquitous CMV promoter or the muscle-specific CK8e23, SPc5-1224, or MHCK725 promoters driving Cre recombinase expression to the TA muscle of Pax7nGFP; Ai9; mdx mice. Compared to CMV (33%), the efficiency of recombination was about half for CK8e (15.6%) and MHCK7 (15.6%) and a third for SpC5-12 (11.5%) suggesting that these muscle-specific promoters are active in satellite cells, albeit to a lesser degree than CMV (FIG. 3A).

To compare gene editing efficiencies in ubiquitous vs. muscle specific promoters, we drove SaCas9 expression with either CMV, CK8e, SPc5-12, or MHCK7 promoters and delivered AAV9-CRISPR constructs intramuscularly at equivalent viral doses. We compared dystrophin restoration at the bulk muscle level between the different promoters and immunofluorescence staining of TA muscle sections revealed higher numbers of dystrophin+ fibers in muscles treated with AAV-CRISPR harboring MHCK7 (73%), SPc5-12 (53%), and CK8e (48.3%) promoters compared to CMV (35%) (FIG. 3B). Using the unbiased Tn5 tagmentation-based method, we also quantified the level of gene editing outcomes across these different promoters in the bulk muscle (FIG. 3C and FIG. 3D). We found the highest occurrence of deletions in the MHCK7-Cas9 treated mice, followed by SPc5-12. To determine if gene-editing can be accomplished in satellite cells with muscle-specific promoters, we isolated GFP+ satellite cells from treated mice and performed PCR across the Dmd locus. Exon 23 deletion bands were detected in all conditions (FIG. 3E). By replacing the CMV promoter with various muscle-specific promoters to drive Cre recombinase and delivering equal doses of AAV9, we observed that muscle-specific promoters CK8e, SpC5-12, and MHCK7 were indeed active in satellite cells. The MHCK7 promoter led to the greatest level of dystrophin restoration (FIG. 3B) and gene editing (FIG. 3C).

### Example 5

**Sustained Dystrophin Expression in AAV-CRISPR-Treated Muscle after Serial Injuries**

Targeting satellite cells for dystrophin gene correction could provide a self-renewing source of dystrophin-expressing cells that might provide continued therapeutic effects even after loss of the episomal AAV vector. To investigate the long-term contribution of dystrophin-corrected satellite cells, we injected TA muscles of mdx mice with AAV9-CRISPR constructs with CMV promoter driving Cas9 and monitored dystrophin expression. Because the mdx mouse model does not recapitulate the severity of the human DMD degenerative phenotype, we accelerated muscle degeneration and regeneration by implementing a serial injury strategy. Four weeks after the initial injection of AAV9-CRISPR constructs, mice were injected with 50 μL of 1.2% barium chloride (BaCl2) to induce muscle injury every 2 weeks for a maximum of 6 weeks (FIG. 4A). This dose of BaCl2 injury to the TA induced necrosis in over 80% of muscle fibers 18 hours after injury in wild-type mice. We thus hypothesized that 2 or 3 rounds of injury would be sufficient to induce degeneration of CRISPR-treated myofibers followed by regeneration of new myofibers from satellite cells. After 2 or 3 injuries, we could no longer detect SaCas9 protein in the TA muscle by western blot, indicating loss of the AAV9-CRISPR constructs (FIG. 4B). Despite loss of vector, we observed maintenance of dystrophin expression over three rounds of regeneration by immunofluorescence staining (FIG. 4C). Quantification of dystrophin+ fibers as a fraction of all fibers (laminin+) indicates an initial restoration of dystrophin in 28.3% of fibers that decreased to ˜10% after either 2 or 3 injuries FIG. 4D). Western blot of protein lysate also indicated maintenance of dystrophin protein after loss of SaCas9 (FIG. 4E).

### Example 6

**Serial Transplantation of CRISPR-Corrected Satellite Cells Contributes to Regeneration of Dystrophin+ Myofibers**

To demonstrate that gene-edited satellite cells can give rise to dystrophin+ myofibers we performed a serial transplantation study (FIG. 5A). Pax7nGFP; mdx mice were injected in the hindlimb with either AAV9-CRISPR constructs or PBS. Eight weeks later, the injected muscles were harvested and ˜30,000 GFP+ satellite cells were sorted by FACS. Sorted cells were immediately transplanted into the TA muscle of an otherwise untreated mdx host mouse, which received 18 Gy irradiation 2 days prior to incapacitate host satellite cells (Boldrin, L., et al. Stem Cells 2012, 30, 1971-1984). The host mice were immunosuppressed with daily intraperitoneal injections of tacrolimus. At four weeks post engraftment, the TA muscles were harvested and analyzed for dystrophin expression. Patches of dystrophin+ fibers were observed in the host TA muscles injected with CRISPR-corrected satellite cells (FIG. 5B). Mdx host mice that were injected with satellite cells harvested from PBS-injected Pax7nGFP; mdx donor mice displayed 1.46±0.41 dystrophin+ fibers per mm2, which is similar to the number of revertant fibers found in mdx mice of the same age group (Pigozzo, S. R. et al. PLoS One 2013, 8). In contrast, mdx mice that were injected with satellite cells harvested from AAV9-CRISPR-injected mdx mice displayed 5.95±0.40 dystrophin+ fibers per mm2 (FIG. 5C), suggesting that transplantation of CRISPR-corrected satellite cells led to an increase in dystrophin+ fibers. When we performed a deletion PCR across the Dmd locus, we observed a deletion band only in genomic DNA from the host TA that was injected with AAV9-CRISPR-treated satellite cells, indicating that the dystrophin+ fibers observed in that group are produced from gene-edited cells (FIG. 4D and FIG. 4E).

Two independent methods were used to show that satellite cells are edited by AAV-CRISPR in vivo: assessing maintenance of dystrophin expression after degeneration (FIG. 4A-FIG. 4E) and dystrophin expression following satellite cell transplantation (FIG. 5A-FIG. 5E). Longevity of dystrophin expression after three rounds of degeneration and regeneration was demonstrated. This indicates long-term contribution from dystrophin-corrected satellite cells. Importantly, since satellite cells are self-renewing and there are many satellite cells on each fiber, even low levels of edited satellite cells may lead to significant levels of dystrophin-positive fibers over time.

Using an unbiased Tn5 tagmentation-based sequencing method, we provide quantifications of the amount of gene editing in satellite cells. Delivery to satellite cells by these methods are an important and unexpected consideration for their ultimate success in the context of inherited muscular dystrophies. The novel optimization of gene editing technologies and delivery methods demonstrated herein provide novel enhanced satellite cell gene editing to provide long-term therapeutic effect for DMD patients.

The foregoing description of the specific aspects will so fully reveal the general nature of the invention that others can, by applying knowledge within the skill of the art, readily modify and/or adapt for various applications such specific aspects, without undue experimentation, without departing from the general concept of the present disclosure. Therefore, such adaptations and modifications are intended to be within the meaning and range of equivalents of the disclosed aspects, based on the teaching and guidance presented herein. It is to be understood that the phraseology or terminology herein is for the purpose of description and not of limitation, such that the terminology or phraseology of the present specification is to be interpreted by the skilled artisan in light of the teachings and guidance.

The breadth and scope of the present disclosure should not be limited by any of the above-described exemplary aspects, but should be defined only in accordance with the following claims and their equivalents.

All publications, patents, patent applications, and/or other documents cited in this application are incorporated by reference in their entirety for all purposes to the same extent as if each individual publication, patent, patent application, and/or other document were individually indicated to be incorporated by reference for all purposes.

For reasons of completeness, various aspects of the invention are set out in the following numbered clauses:

Clause 1. A vector composition comprising: (a) a polynucleotide sequence encoding at least one guide RNA (gRNA); (b) a polynucleotide sequence encoding a Cas9 protein or a fusion protein comprising the Cas9 protein; and (c) one or more promoters, each promoter operably linked to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the at least one gRNA and/or the polynucleotide sequence encoding the Cas9 protein or fusion protein.

Clause 2. The composition of clause 1, wherein the one or more promoters is a muscle specific promoter.

Clause 3. The composition of clause 1 or 2, wherein the one or more promoters comprises a CK8, SPc5-12, or MHCK7 promoter, or a combination thereof.

Clause 4. The composition of any one of clauses 1-3, for use in editing a satellite cell.

Clause 5. The composition of any one of clauses 1-4, wherein the vector is a viral vector.

Clause 6. The composition of clause 5, wherein the viral vector is an Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector.

Clause 7. The composition of clause 6, wherein the AAV vector is an AAV8 vector, an AAV1 vector, an AAV6.2 vector, an AAVrh74 vector, or an AAV9 vector.

Clause 8. The composition of any one of clauses 1-7, wherein the composition comprises a single vector that comprises (a) the polynucleotide sequence encoding at least one gRNA, (b) the polynucleotide sequence encoding a Cas9 protein or a fusion protein comprising the Cas9 protein, and (c) the one or more promoters.

Clause 9. The composition of any one of clauses 1-7, wherein the composition comprises two or more vectors comprising (a) the polynucleotide sequence encoding at least one gRNA, (b) the polynucleotide sequence encoding a Cas9 protein or a fusion protein comprising the Cas9 protein, and (c) the one or more promoters.

Clause 10. The composition of clause 9, wherein the first vector comprises the polynucleotide sequence encoding the at least one gRNA; and the second vector comprises the polynucleotide sequence encoding the Cas9 protein or fusion protein.

Clause 11. The composition of any one of clauses 1-10, wherein the promoter is operably linked to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the Cas9 protein or fusion protein.

Clause 12. The composition of any one of clauses 1-11, wherein the promoter is operably linked to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the at least one gRNA.

Clause 13. The composition of any one of clauses 9-12, wherein the composition comprises two or more gRNAs, wherein the two or more gRNAs comprises a first gRNA and a second gRNA, wherein the first vector encodes the first gRNA, and wherein the second vector encodes the second gRNA.

Clause 14. The composition of clause 13, wherein the first vector further encodes the Cas9 protein or fusion protein.

Clause 15. The composition of any one of clauses 9-14, wherein the second vector further encodes the Cas9 protein or fusion protein.

Clause 16. The composition of any one of clauses 9-15, wherein the promoter is operably linked to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the Cas9 protein or fusion protein.

Clause 17. The composition of any one of clauses 13-16, wherein the promoter is operably linked to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the first gRNA and/or to the polynucleotide sequence encoding the second gRNA.

Clause 18. The composition of any one of clauses 1-17, wherein the Cas9 protein is a Staphylococcus aureus Cas9 protein or a Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 protein.

Clause 19. The composition of any one of clauses 3-18, wherein the CK8 promoter comprises a polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO: 51, wherein the Spc5-12 promoter comprises a polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO: 52, and wherein the MHCK7 promoter comprises a polynucleotide sequence of SEQ ID NO: 53.

Clause 20. The composition of clause 1, wherein the vector is selected from the group consisting of SEQ ID NOs: 54-59.

Clause 21. The composition of any one of the preceding clauses, wherein the vector targets stem cells.

Clause 22. The composition of any one of the preceding clauses, wherein the vector has tropism for muscle satellite cells.

Clause 23. A cell comprising the composition of any one of clauses 1-22.

Clause 24. A kit comprising the composition of any one of clauses 1-22.

Clause 25. A method of correcting a mutant gene in a cell, the method comprising administering to a cell the composition of any one of clauses 1-22.

Clause 26. The method of clause 25, wherein the cell is a satellite cell.

Clause 27. The method of clause 25 or 26, wherein the mutant gene is a dystrophin gene.

Clause 28. A method of genome editing a mutant dystrophin gene in a subject, the method comprising administering to the subject a genome editing composition comprising the composition of any one of clauses 1-22.

Clause 29. The method of clause 28, wherein the genome editing composition is administered to the subject intramuscularly, intravenously, or a combination thereof.

Clause 30. A method of treating a subject in need thereof having a mutant dystrophin gene, the method comprising administering to the subject the composition of any one of clauses 1-22 or the cell of clause 23.

Clause 31. A method of treating a subject with DMD, the method comprising contacting a cell with the composition of any one of clauses 1-22.

Clause 32. The method of clause 31 or the cell of clause 23, wherein the cell is a muscle cell, a satellite cell, or a stem cell.

Clause 33. The method of clause 31 or the cell of clause 23, wherein the cell is a satellite cell.

Clause 34. The method of any one of clauses 30-33, wherein the cell is contacted with the composition in vivo, in vitro, and/or ex vivo.

Clause 35. The method of any one of clauses 30-34, wherein the cell is transplanted to the subject after the cell is contacted with the composition.

Clause 36. The method of clause 35, wherein the cell is allogeneic and autologous.

Clause 37. The method of clause 35 or 36, wherein the cell is administered to the muscle of the subject.

Clause 38. The method of any one of clauses 35-37, wherein the subject is immunosuppressed before being transplanted with the cell.

Clause 39. The method of any one of clauses 35-38, wherein the cell is transplanted to the subject via a route selected from intramuscular, intravenous, caudal, intravitreous, intrastriatal, intraparenchymal, intrathecal, epidural, retrobulbar, subcutaneous, intracardiac, intracystic, intra-aiticular or intrathecal injection, epidural catheter infusion, sub arachnoid block catheter infusion, intravenous infusion, via nebulizer, via spray, via intravaginal routes, or a combination thereof.

Clause 40. A method of screening an AAV vector with a satellite cell tropism, the method comprising administering to a mammal the AAV vector, wherein the mammal comprises an allele harboring a CAG-loxP-STOP-loxP-tdTomato expression cassette at Rosa26, and wherein the pax7 gene of the mammal is knocked in with a gene expressing a fluorescent protein.

Clause 41. The method of clause 40, wherein the gene of interest encodes Cre.

Clause 42. The method of clause 40, wherein the fluorescent protein comprises GFP, YFP, RFP, or CFP, or a variant thereof.

Clause 43. A method of correcting a mutant gene in a satellite cell, the method comprising administering to a cell the composition of any one of clauses 1-22.

Clause 44. The composition of any one of clauses 1-22, the cell of clause 23, the kit of clause 24, or the method of any one of clauses 25-43, wherein the at least one gRNA binds and targets a polynucleotide sequence comprising SEQ ID NO: 49 or 50 or a complement thereof, or comprises a polynucleotide sequence comprising SEQ ID NO: 60 or 61 or a complement thereof.

