# INTRODUCTION

Transparent conductors (TCs), which are materials capable of conducting electrical signals while transmitting light at the same time, play a critical role in many optoelectronic and photonic applications, such as liquid crystal displays, touch screens, photovoltaic cells, light emitting diodes (LEDs), smart windows, and EMI shielding. [1][2][3][4][5][6] Most of the research work on TCs has focused on the visible (VIS) spectral range (380 nm-750 nm). However, high optical transmission beyond the VIS region, extended to the near-infrared (NIR-750 nm to 2400 nm) and mid-infrared (MIR-2400 nm to 8000 nm) spectra, is crucial in many emerging applications. [7][8][9][10][11][12] For example, photovoltaic cells converting light into electricity would have larger efficiency if they also made use of the IR part of the solar spectrum, which accounts for 52% of the total spectral irradiance.

Similarly, IR photodetectors and cameras and all devices for optical fiber communication operating at 1550 nm can dramatically benefit from TCs with extended IR transparency.

Materials such as ultrathin metal films (UTMFs), wide bandgap semiconductors, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), metallic nanowires, conductive polymers, perovskites, and graphene [13][14][15][16][17] have been extensively studied as TCs and also for NIR range applications. However, they still suffer from several drawbacks such as poor adhesion, poor stability, large surface roughness, high junction resistance, high optical scattering, and difficulty in large area processing. In addition, in several instances, they do not achieve a competitive trade-off between optical transparency and electrical conductivity. 8 Despite being investigated for several decades, indium tin oxide (ITO) is still considered the archetypal material due to its high optical transmission, electrical conductivity, strong adhesion to substrates, easy processing (e.g., patterning through etching technique),

# ARTICLE

scitation.org/journal/apm and excellent stability in harsh environments. 18 An intensive effort has been devoted to increase the transparency and conductivity of ITO films with various doping mechanisms, thermal/chemical treatments, and deposition methods. [19][20][21][22][23] However, so far, the majority of the work has focused on optimizing the transparency in the VIS spectral range.

In this paper, we demonstrate the development of ITO-based near-infrared transparent conductors (NIR-TCs) with low infrared reflectivity and absorption, thus with high optical transmission, average 78% over 750 nm-2400 nm and more than 80% at 1550 nm, including substrate contribution, while still maintaining a high electrical conductivity (electrical resistivity < 1.9 × 10 -4 Ω cm). Moreover, the proposed NIR-TCs maintain high optical transmission in the VIS (>83% over 380 nm-750 nm). This is achieved by a scalable and simple process: rapid thermal annealing with an optimized set of parameters in a controlled atmosphere. The application potential of the newly developed material is demonstrated by fabricating quantum dot solar cells and liquid crystal optical switches showing superior performance in the NIR compared to similar devices made with conventional, commercially available ITO.

## HIGH TEMPERATURE PROCESSING OF ITO-BASED NIR-TCS

It has been reported that thermal annealing improves the structural, optical, and electrical properties of as-deposited ITO. 20,24 The state-of-the-art and commercially available ITO relies mostly on low temperature annealing (LTA), typically performed at 200 ○ C-300 ○ C and under uncontrolled atmospheric conditions. We investigated and compared the effect of high temperature annealing (HTA, greater than 700 ○ C) on the properties of ITO over a broad optical spectrum. Figure 1 ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/apm 100 nm were deposited onto fused silica substrates via RF sputtering at room temperature either at ICFO or Stuttgart University. Substrate preparation and deposition conditions given in the following of this section are for ICFO's ITO. Instead, the post-deposition HTA processing conditions were similar for ICFO and Stuttgart materials, leading to comparatively similar optical spectra with extended IR transparency. Prior to ITO deposition, double-side, optically polished, fused silica glass substrates, with a thickness of 1 mm and an area of 1 in 2 , were cleaned by ultrasonication in an acetone bath for 10 min, followed by ultrasonication in an ethanol bath for 10 min. The substrates were then rinsed in deionized water and dried with a stream of nitrogen gas. The ITO was deposited by magnetron sputtering. The sputtering chamber was initially evacuated to a base pressure of approximately 10 -7 -10 -8 Torr. Prior to deposition, in order to improve film adhesion to the substrate, low-power argon plasma cleaning was performed for 15 min inside the sputtering chamber [using Ar gas (20 sccm) at a pressure of 8 mTorr and using a bias power of 40 W]. An ITO (99.99%) sputtering target (Kurt J. Lesker Co.) was used for depositing ITO films with a DC power of 60 W and a working pressure of 2 mTorr. The deposition was conducted under an Ar/O 2 gas mixture (flux ratio of 20:1) at room temperature. The target-to-substrate distance was maintained at 30 cm, and the substrate holder was rotated during deposition at a speed of 60 rpm. The deposition rate was 0.694 Å s -1 .

We then annealed the ITO films at various temperatures starting from 350 ○ C to 850 ○ C in a rapid thermal processing (RTP) equipment in nitrogen flux for a short period (90 s). The annealing is carried out in an RTP-150-HV rapid thermal process oven (UniTemp, GmBH) at different temperatures under nitrogen flux. Prior to annealing, the process chamber is iteratively purged (12 l min -1 -20 l min -1 ) with nitrogen gas and evacuated, and the sequence is repeated three times to ensure oxygen-free conditions inside the process chamber. During annealing, the N 2 flow is reduced to 2 l min -1 . Upon completion of the annealing time, the N 2 flow is increased to 10 l min -1 to expedite cooling of the process chamber. Figure S1 (supplementary material) shows a typical process flow diagram for a 2 h high-temperature annealing process.

Figure S2 (supplementary material) shows the Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the films for different process temperatures. We observed that the sheet resistance decreased with increasing temperature up to 750 ○ C but increased abruptly above that point. We thus considered 750 ○ C as the HTA temperature for subsequent experiments and investigated the effect of annealing time. In order to compare HTA to conventional LTA, the latter annealing process was performed using a hot plate in standard ambient atmosphere. The as-deposited ITO was placed on the hot plate, and its temperature was gradually increased to 200 ○ C in a few minutes. After keeping the temperature at 200 ○ C for 1 h, the hot plate was switched off and the sample was removed after the system cooled down below 50 ○ C.

## MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF NIR-TCS

The structural morphologies of the thin ITO films were investigated with atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Figure 1(b) depicts the cross-sectional depth profiles of the as-deposited and HTA processed ITO films (HTA-ITO). The image shows that the HTA process leads to the formation of a micro-/nano-structured surface with grooves 25 around the grains, and the corresponding surface roughness [root mean square (rms) value] was 3.43 nm. Instead, the as-deposited film forms a relatively smooth surface with an rms roughness of 0.52 nm. The surface morphology of LTA film was also investigated and compared with that of HTA film [SEM images, Figs. 1(d) and 1(e), respectively]. No grooves were observed in the LTA processed ITO film. We note that the effective surface area of HTA-ITO is slightly increased by grooving, making it potentially advantageous for use in applications such as organic solar cells, where an increase in the contact area between the hole transport layer and the ITO anode may eventually increase the hole extraction efficiency and, as a result, power conversion efficiency. 26 

## OPTICAL AND ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES OF NIR-TCS

The electrical properties of the ITO films were measured according to the four-point probe method using a Cascade Microtech 44/7 S 2749 probe station connected to a Keithley 2001 multimeter. The sheet resistance (Rs) is an average of six different measurements, each recorded at a different position on the substrate area with the ITO film. The surface morphology of the films is investigated by AFM (Bruker Dimension FastScan D3100) using a lateral resolution of <7 nm and field-emission SEM (Zeiss 1550VP). A spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer LAMBDA 950) was used for optical spectra measurements in the VIS and NIR wavelength ranges.

To investigate the effect of HTA time on optical properties of ITO, the as-deposited ITO films were annealed at 750 ○ C for different times between 15 min and 10 h, and their corresponding optical spectra were recorded. Figures 2(a) and 2(b) show the transmission and reflection spectra, respectively, of different annealing times of HTA-ITO films, which are compared with as-deposited ITO and LTA-ITO. Figures 2(c) and 2(d) represent their corresponding fitting spectra, using a Drude-Sommerfeld permittivity for the ITO films, where scattering time τ was used as a fitting parameter while the plasma frequency was calculated as ω 2 p = 1/(ε 0 Rstτ), where Rs is the measured electrical sheet resistance values and t is the film thickness (100 nm). The fitting values corresponding to each spectrum are shown in Table I.

The R and T spectra of ITO films from the UV to the NIR (300 nm-2400 nm) were simulated using a custom Python code implementing the transfer matrix method (TMM, Python TMM package developed by S. Byrnes 27 ). For the ITO optical properties, a Drude-Sommerfeld permittivity ε = ε∞ -ω 2 p /(ω 2 -iΓω) was used, 24 where ω 2 p = n s e 2 ε 0 m * t is the plasma frequency and τ = 1/Γ = m * e μ is the scattering time. In the model, t = 100 nm, and we assumed ε∞ = 4 and m * = 0.35me. 28 For each ITO film, the experimental Rs was used to predetermine the product of carrier density (n s ∼ ω 2 p ) and mobility (μ ∼ τ) since ω 2 p τ = 1/(ε 0 Rst). Then, both R and T spectra were fitted using the Drude-Sommerfeld model above with only τ as the free parameter to find the best-fit ns and μ values reported in Table I and used to plot the simulated spectra in Figs. 2(c) and 2(d). For the fused silica substrate, the dispersion model from Malitson 29 was used. Note that the Drude-Sommerfeld model does not reproduce accurately the UV part of the spectrum where interband transitions  I). As the optical and electrical response varied among as-deposited ITO samples prepared in a similar way, the dashed line curves are those from a representative sample with an electrical sheet resistance of 27.7 Ω/Sq. The vertical shadow strip represents the conventional band (C-band) of optical telecommunication (from 1530 nm to 1565 nm).

### TABLE I.

Electrical properties of NIR-TCs. Hall electrical transport measurement results of sheet resistance, resistivity, carrier density, and mobility of lower temperature annealed (LTA) ITO and high temperature annealed (HTA) ITO films, compared with the calculated values from the fitting of optical transmission and reflection in Fig. 2. The electrical transport data for as-deposited ITO are not included as there is a strong variation in electrical response from sample to sample, which also varies over time.   30 Nevertheless, we found that restricting the spectral window (i.e., to 500 nm-2400 nm) does not significantly affect the fitting results. The dashed curves are those of a representative as-deposited ITO sample with an electrical sheet resistance of 27.7 Ω/Sq. The asdeposited samples showed a different optical and electrical response even if prepared in similar ways. Despite this, the LTA and HTA processed ITO films show a good level of reproducibility. As an example, Fig. S3 (supplementary material) shows the optical transmission and reflection curves for six different as-deposited ITO films, which are HTA treated for 2 h. It is clear from Fig. 2 that the in the NIR decreases, leading to an increase in transmission with HTA time. This increase and the corresponding increase in resistivity correspond to a decrease in carrier density, leading also to a redshift in plasma wavelength. 18 Table I summarizes the electrical properties of HTA-ITO substrates, compared with LTA-ITO, measured via electrical transport Hall measurements. The Hall measured carrier density and mobility compare favorably with the calculated values from fitting R and T optical spectra in Fig. 2. The electrical transport data for the as-deposited ITO are not included. This is because, as it was mentioned, there are large variations in electrical properties from sample to sample, which also change over time. Compared to LTA, HTA causes an increase in carrier mobility and a slight decrease in the carrier density of ITO. The mobility improvement is likely to be due to improved crystallinity, while the density reduction is probably due to a decrease of defects releasing carriers. 31,32 In order to study the effect of cumulative annealing, the same as-deposited ITO was annealed multiple times, and the corresponding optical spectra and sheet resistance were recorded. Table II summarizes the comparison of optical transmission and sheet resistance of as-deposited, LTA-ITO, and HTA-ITO for different cumulative times. Figure S4 (supplementary material) shows the corresponding optical transmission spectra. All HTA data are from the same sample, and cumulative annealing time is calculated. With HTA of 10 h, maximum transmission of 82.4% was achieved at the wavelength of 1550 nm, with a corresponding sheet resistance of 22.3 Ω/sq. Average transmissions of 77.8% and 83.9% were also achieved in the NIR and visible spectra, respectively. In contrast, after only 15 min of HTA, the film exhibited a lower sheet resistance (12.2 Ω/sq.), a higher average visible transmission (86.0%), and a lower NIR transmission (63.7%). The trade-off between optical transparency and electrical conductivity is shown in Fig. S5 (supplementary material), where average transmissions at 1550 nm in the visible and the NIR spectra are plotted against the electrical resistivity. Thus, the data in the table and the figures indicate that the sheet resistance and optical properties can be modulated by changing the HTA duration. For comparison, the LTA process leads to a sheet resistance of 15.7 Ω/sq. and a transmission of 56.3% in the NIR spectra. Note that these values are slightly different from Table I and Fig. 2 as they are for different samples. This highlights the substantial improvement that can be achieved with HTA.

#### Carrier density

In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed NIR-TCs, their NIR transmission (at 1550 nm) and resistivity are compared with previously reported works, as shown in Table III. The reported values are recalculated considering substrate contribution. Figure S6(a) (supplementary material) plots the transmission against resistivity using data reported in Table III. For improved comparison, the sheet resistance values of the referenced work are also calculated (sheet resistance = resistivity divided by thickness). Figure S6(b) (supplementary material) shows the corresponding transmission at 1550 nm as a function of sheet resistance. For a similar trade-off, the lower thickness is preferred. For example, Refs. 20 and 39 show transmission and sheet resistance trade-offs similar to our study but with 2.5 and 5 times thicker ITO films, respectively. Additionally, for further comparison, one can also use the widely accepted Haacke figure of merit (FoM), 33 given by Φ TC = T 10 /Rs, where T is the transmission and Rs is the sheet resistance.

It is clear from the table that among all different ITO materials referenced in this work, the proposed NIR-TC presents the highest FoM in the NIR.

## PERFORMANCE IN SOLAR CELLS

To assess the application potential, quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs) incorporating the newly developed ITO-based NIR-TC have been fabricated and tested. Due to their high conversion efficiency and unique properties, QDSCs are gaining much attention in the energy harvesting sector. 42,43 The photoactive layer of aQDSC   

### ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/apm

consists of stacks of QDs, which are nanoparticles of semiconductors with diameters of several nanometers. The bandgaps of QDs can be modulated by varying their diameters by exploiting the quantum confinement effect. 44,45 The bandgap modulation makes absorb a wider range of the frequencies of the spectra, including NIR and IR frequencies, which can potentially result in the fabrication of solar cells with higher efficiency. For this to happen, it is crucial to achieve high transmission while still maintaining low sheet resistance for TC in the cell.

In order to evaluate the efficiency of QDSCs, two devices were fabricated. One cell was assembled with the NIR-TC and the other one with commercial ITO (100 nm thick) as the bottom TC layer. Prior to the fabrication of the cells, the NIR-TC (ITO-HTA, 2 h) and the commercial ITO measured 16.2 Ω/sq. and 18.6 Ω/sq., respectively. The basic structure and layers of the QDSC are shown in Fig. 3(a). A chloride doped ZnO (Cl_ZnO) was used as the electron transport layer (ETL), and the active layer was made of 385 nm thick, 0.7 eV lead sulfide (PbS) colloidal QDs (CQDs), which were treated with a mixed ligand of ZnI 2 /MPA. In addition, another layer of PbS CQD treated with EDT was used as the hole transport layer (HTL). The design, optimization, and implementation of the cell were performed according to the details given in Ref. 46.

The overall efficiency of QDSCs is determined by analyzing the cell parameters, which is summarized in Table IV. It is seen that the cell made with NIR-TC provides better performance than commercial ITO. The NIR-TC accounts 5% increase in current density (JSC) and a 7.8% increase in power conversion efficiency (PCE) in comparison with the commercial ITO counterpart.

The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the solar cell, which is the ratio of the number of incident photons to the number of carriers generated after conversion, is a function of the wavelength (the absorption in the active layer also depends on the incident wavelength or energy). In order to evaluate the performance improvement of the cell in the NIR using NIR-TC, EQE is plotted against wavelength, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The current density (JSC) at different wavelengths of the spectra can then calculated from the EQE results by using the following formula:

Table V summarizes the calculated values of Jsc values over different wavelength ranges. In all spectral ranges, the NIR-TC showed a higher current density. In the visible spectra, the current density remains almost the same, whereas in the NIR spectra, particularly at 1650 nm, the proposed NIR-TC shows an EQE improvement of 27.7% (from 15.4% to 19.7%). This underlines the substantial improvement of solar cell performance by using the proposed NIR-TC structures.

## PERFORMANCE IN LIQUID CRYSTAL CELLS

To further demonstrate the potential of the developed NIR-TCs, switching devices working in the NIR spectra based on LC cells were fabricated and tested. In order to evaluate the efficiency of the LC switch, two cells were fabricated, the first with commercial ITO and the second with proposed NIR-TC. The basic structure and layers of the LC cell are shown in Fig. 3(c). A polyimide coating of SE-1211 from Nissan Chemicals was used to pre-align the liquid crystal layer. The polyimide was spin-coated onto the ITO glass substrates, baked at 80 ○ C for 5 min, and then annealed at 180 ○ C for 1 h. The polyimide-ITO-glass was then rubbed gently with a velvet cloth in anti-parallel directions. 47 To maintain a cell gap, spacers of 4 μm diameter (SEKISUI CHEMICAL) were deposited by spin coating onto one of the substrates. The substrates were then sealed together to form the cell using NOA81 optical glue. Next, the cell was filled in a vacuum with a liquid crystal (developed by the Military University of Technology) before final sealing.

Figure 3(d) shows the comparison between the optical spectra of the LC cells fabricated with NIR-TC and commercial ITO. It is seen that the cell made with NIR-TC provides comparatively better performance than commercial ITO. At 1550 nm, for LC cells incorporating NIR-TC, the transmission is 25% higher than   3(e) shows the electro-optical response of the LC cell fabricated with the NIR-TC. The LC cell was between crossed polarizers. A 2 kHz square pulse voltage modulated with a low frequency square signal (5 Hz) with an amplitude of 6 V was applied to the cell using a function generator. The input signal of a He-Ne laser (λ = 633 nm) was detected by the photodetector connected to the digital storage oscilloscope. The maximum transmission was obtained by placing the cell between parallel polarizers [denoted by PP cell in Fig. 3(e)]. The time response data havebeen averaged for ease of reading and are presented in Fig. 3(e). Note that the switching test was performed in the VIS as further optimization of the LC material is needed for high modulation in the NIR.

## SUMMARY

We demonstrated a high temperature annealing (HTA) method to increase the optical transmission of ITO films in the near-infrared (NIR) while maintaining high transmission in the visible (VIS) spectra together with high electrical conductivity. We achieved an average NIR optical transmission exceeding 77% over 750 nm-2400 nm together with more than 80% transmission at 1550 nm. This is, together with electrical resistivity, lower than 1.9 × 10 -4 Ω cm. In comparison with conventional low temperature annealing (LTA) methods, it is shown that the proposed method provides 40% higher relative transmission in the NIR spectra for the same sheet resistance. This improvement in optical and electrical properties leads to an enhanced device performance, which we tested and verified by fabricating an efficient quantum dot solar cell and a liquid crystal switch incorporating the HTA processed ITO. The application of the newly developed NIR-TC can outperform a number of current device efficiencies and can be effectively exploited in a number of applications such as solar cells, photodetectors, light emitting diodes (LEDs), and communication applications.

## SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

The RTA process flow diagram, SEM images, the process repeatability curves for transmission and reflection, RTA cumulative annealing results, comparison of average transmission of the ITO films, and the comparison of different ITO fabrication approaches in the literature are provided in the supplementary material. 

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness through Grant No. MAT2017-85232-R (AEI/FEDER, EU) and the Spanish State Research Agency through the "Severo Ochoa" program for Centers of Excellence in R&D (CEX2019-000910-S and CEX2019-000917 S), and project TUNA-SURF (Grant No. PID2019-106892RB-I00), from Fundació Cellex, Fundació Mir-Puig and from Generalitat de Catalunya through the CERCA program through AGAUR Grant Nos. 2017 SGR 1634 and 2017 301 SGR1377. C.G. acknowledges the funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. 713729. This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. 754510. Y.C. acknowledges the China Scholarship Council (Grant No. 201506890029). The authors also acknowledge Vittoria Finazzi for her help and fruitful discussions. R.A.M., P.M., and V.P. are co-inventors of a patent application related to the results of this paper.

## DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.

