# DESCRIPTION

The present application claims the benefit of U.S. provisional patent application No. 61/458,771, filed Dec. 1, 2011, which is herein incorporated by reference in its entirety.

## FIELD OF THE INVENTION

The field of the invention relates to antibody display systems and methods of use for identifying antibodies that bind specifically to an antigen.

## BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

A technique for constructing and screening antibody libraries is phage display, whereby the protein of interest is expressed as a polypeptide fusion to a bacteriophage coat protein and subsequently screened by binding to immobilized or soluble biotinylated ligand.

Phage display, however, has several shortcomings. For example, some eukaryotic secreted proteins and cell surface proteins require post-translational modifications such as glycosylation or extensive disulfide isomerization, which are unavailable in bacterial cells.

Current yeast surface antibody display systems, such as cold capture, also suffer from various drawbacks. In the cold capture antibody display system, at low temperatures, the process of antibody release from host cell transport vesicles is delayed, so that the secreted antibody can be assayed on the cell surface for antigen binding. The cold capture method suffers from a low signal-to-noise ratio and identification of an antibody with specificity for the target antigen depends heavily on cellular expression levels of the antibody.

The affinity matrix system couples antibodies to the host cell surface, e.g., by biotin, where they can be assayed for antigen binding. The affinity matrix system exhibits a high incidence of cross-contamination between antibody clones. Antibodies may become decoupled from the host cell and, thus lose their link to the polynucleotides encoding their immunoglobulin chains.

Full length antibody display systems tether the full length antibody on the host cell surface by binding an immunoglobulin binding protein, such as protein A, that is fused to a cell surface anchor protein. The host cell contains polynucleotides encoding the antibody immunoglobulin chains. Typically, binding of the antibody occurs after the immunoglobulin binding protein is expressed on the cell surface. This system, thus, leads to some erroneous binding of the antibody to host cells that do not express the antibody.

## SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

The present invention provides, in part, an antibody display system that does not suffer from shortcomings of currently available systems. The present invention also allows coupling of antibody display to production strain selection. The strain discovered by surface display screening can be turned into the production strain while preserving the antibody sequence and integrity. This method enables screening for parameters such as antibody folding and expression.

The present invention provides an antibody display system comprising: (a) an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., a Pichia cell such as Pichia pastoris); (b) a bait comprising a Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof (e.g., comprising a CH3, CH2-CH3 or VH—CH1 polypeptide) (e.g., human) fused to a surface anchor polypeptide or functional fragment thereof (e.g., wherein the cell comprises a polynucleotide encoding the bait); (c) one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin light chain variable region; and (d) one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region. Optionally, the antibody display system further comprises a non-tethered full antibody comprising said immunoglobulin light and heavy chains; and/or monovalent antibody fragment which is complexed with the Fc moiety of the bait. In an embodiment of the invention, said one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin light chain variable region is from a genetically diverse population of immunoglobulin light chain variable regions (e.g., an immunoglobulin library); and/or, wherein said one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region is from a genetically diverse population of immunoglobulin heavy chain variable regions (e.g., an immunoglobulin library). In an embodiment of the invention, the host cell comprises a polynucleotide encoding the bait which is operably associated with a regulatable promoter (e.g., a GUT1 promoter, a GADPH promoter or a PCK1 promoter).

The present invention also provides an isolated bait polypeptide, e.g., comprising an Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof (e.g., wherein the Fc is derived from an IgG1, IgG2, IgG3 or IgG4 immunoglobulin; e.g., human, e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, a CH2-CH3 or a CH3 polypeptide) fused to a surface anchor polypeptide (e.g., SED1) or functional fragment thereof. Any isolated polynucleotide encoding such a polypeptide; vectors including the polynucleotides and isolated host cells comprising the polynucleotides and vectors form part of the present invention. The scope of the present invention includes an isolated host cell (e.g., a eukaryotic host cell such as Pichia, e.g., Pichia pastoris) further comprising one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin light chain variable region (e.g., from a library); and/or one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region (e.g., from a library). In an embodiment of the invention, a host cell of the present invention includes the polypeptide located on the surface of the cell, e.g., on the cell membrane.

The present invention comprises an isolated host cell (e.g., Pichia such as Pichia pastoris) comprising a bait polypeptide complexed with an Fc/antigen-binding fragment, e.g., located at the host cell surface by a cell surface anchor (such as SED1) that is part of the bait; optionally wherein the Fc/antigen-binding fragment is bound to an antigen; optionally comprising an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof that comprises the light and heavy chain immunoglobulins of the Fc/antigen-binding fragment; for example, wherein the host cell comprises one or more polynucleotides encoding e.g., the bait, the light chain immunoglobulin and/or the heavy chain immunoglobulin.

The present invention also provides a composition comprising the host cell of the present invention (see e.g., above), further comprising a non-tethered full antibody comprising said immunoglobulin light and heavy chains; and/or an Fc/antigen-binding fragment of an antibody (e.g., a monovalent antibody fragment) which is complexed with the Fc moiety of the bait. In an embodiment of the invention, said full antibody or Fc/antigen-binding fragment is complexed with an antigen.

The present invention provides a method for determining if an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof specifically binds to an antigen comprising contacting an antibody display system with said antigen; wherein the antibody display system comprises: (a) an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia such as Pichia pastoris) comprising a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin light chain (e.g., from a library); and a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain (e.g., from a library); and (b) a bait comprising an Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof (e.g., human, e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, CH2-CH3 or CH3 polypeptide) fused to a surface anchor polypeptide or functional fragment thereof (e.g., SED1) on the surface of said eukaryotic host cell; wherein the Fc of said bait complexes with an Fc/antigen-binding fragment (e.g., a monovalent antibody fragment) comprising said immunoglobulin heavy and immunoglobulin light chains on the surface of the host cell; and determining if said Fc/antigen-binding fragment (e.g., monovalent antibody fragment) specifically binds to said antigen; wherein the antibody is determined to specifically bind said antigen if the monovalent antibody fragment specifically binds to said antigen. In an embodiment of the invention, the method further comprises isolating the polynucleotide(s) and, optionally, determining the nucleotide sequence. In an embodiment of the invention, the method further comprises inhibiting expression of said bait, then determining the affinity of said identified antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof for said antigen. In an embodiment of the invention, the method further comprises recombinantly expressing the immunoglobulin chains encoded by the polynucleotides and, optionally, isolating an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising said immunoglobulins and, optionally, producing a pharmaceutical formulation comprising combining said antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.

The present invention also provides a method for identifying: (i) an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof that binds specifically to an antigen; or (ii) a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain of said antibody or fragment (e.g., from a library) and/or a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin light chain of said antibody or fragment (e.g., from a library); comprising contacting an antibody display system with said antigen wherein the antibody display system comprises: (a) an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia such as Pichia pastoris) comprising a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin light chain; and a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain; and (b) a bait comprising an Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof (e.g., human; e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, CH2-CH3 or CH3 polypeptide) fused to a surface anchor polypeptide or functional fragment thereof (e.g., SED1) on the surface of said eukaryotic host cell; wherein the Fc of said bait complexes with an Fc/antigen-binding fragment (e.g., a monovalent antibody fragment) comprising said immunoglobulin heavy and immunoglobulin light chains on the surface of the host cell; and determining if said Fc/antigen-binding fragment (e.g., monovalent antibody fragment) specifically binds to said antigen; wherein the antibody or fragment or polynucleotide is identified if said specific binding to said antigen is observed. In an embodiment of the invention, the method further comprises isolating the polynucleotide(s) and, optionally, determining the nucleotide sequence. In an embodiment of the invention, the method further comprises inhibiting expression of said bait, then determining the affinity of said identified antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof for said antigen. In an embodiment of the invention, the method further comprises recombinantly expressing the immunoglobulin chains encoded by the polynucleotides and, optionally, isolating an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising said immunoglobulins and, optionally, producing a pharmaceutical formulation comprising combining said antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.

The present invention also provides a method for making an antibody display system comprising: (a) an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia such as Pichia pastoris); (b) a bait comprising a human Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof (e.g., human; e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, CH2-CH3 or CH3 polypeptide) fused to a surface anchor polypeptide or functional fragment thereof (e.g., SED1); (c) one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin light chain variable region (e.g., from a library); (d) one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region (e.g., from a library); comprising introducing, into said eukaryotic host cell, a polynucleotide encoding said bait, said one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin light chain variable region; and said one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region.

The present invention also provides a method for making an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising introducing, into an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia such as Pichia pastoris) comprising a bait that includes a human Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof (e.g., human; e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, CH2-CH3 or CH3 polypeptide) fused to a surface anchor polypeptide or functional fragment thereof (e.g., SED1), one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin light chain variable region; and/or one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region; and culturing the host cell under condition whereby the polynucleotides encoding the immunoglobulin chains are expressed and an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof is formed from said chains; wherein said bait is operably associated with a regulatable promoter (e.g., a GUT1 promoter, a GADPH promoter or a PCK1 promoter) and bait expression is inhibited when said immunoglobulin chains are expressed.

The present invention further comprises a method for making an antibody or antigen binding fragment thereof comprising culturing an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia pastoris) in a growth medium under conditions allowing expression of an immunoglobulin light chain and an immunoglobulin heavy chain of said antibody or fragment; wherein the eukaryotic host cell comprises: (i) a polynucleotide encoding said immunoglobulin light chain; and a polynucleotide encoding said immunoglobulin heavy chain of said antibody or fragment (e.g., wherein said chains are encoded by one common polynucleotide or two separate polynucleotides; and/or, wherein said one or both of said polynucleotides were obtained from a library or from a single clonal source); and (ii) a bait comprising an Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof (e.g., human; e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, CH2-CH3 or CH3 polypeptide) fused to a surface anchor polypeptide or functional fragment thereof on the surface of said eukaryotic host cell; wherein the Fc of said bait complexes with an Fc/antigen-binding fragment (e.g., an monovalent antibody fragment) comprising said immunoglobulin heavy and immunoglobulin light chains on the surface of the host cell; and wherein the expression of the bait is optionally inhibited; wherein said antibody or fragment is optionally secreted from said eukaryotic host cell; optionally comprising isolating said antibody or fragment from said eukaryotic host cell and medium.

The present invention further provides a method for determining the effect of a sugar (e.g., an O-glycan and/or an N-glycan, e.g., any of those discussed herein) on an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof which specifically binds to an antigen comprising contacting an antibody display system with said antigen; wherein the antibody display system comprises: (a) an isolated eukaryotic controlled glycosylation host cell (e.g., Pichia pastoris) comprising a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin light chain; and a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain; and (b) a bait comprising an Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof (e.g., human; e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, CH2-CH3 or CH3 polypeptide) comprising said sugar fused to a surface anchor polypeptide or functional fragment thereof on the surface of said host cell;

wherein the Fc of said bait complexes with the Fc/antigen-binding fragment comprising said immunoglobulin heavy and immunoglobulin light chains on the surface of the host cell; wherein said heavy and/or light chain comprises said sugar;

determining if said Fc/antigen-binding fragment specifically binds to said antigen; determining the binding affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising said sugar for the antigen; and comparing the affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof for the antigen with affinity for the antigen of an otherwise identical antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof which lacks said sugar; wherein the sugar is determined to increase affinity for the antigen if the affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising said sugar is higher than the affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof which lacks the sugar, and/or wherein the sugar is determined to decrease affinity for the antigen if the affinity of antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising said sugar is lower than the affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof which lacks the sugar.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION

The present invention provides a method and system for antibody surface display that simultaneously features a display mode and full antibody secretion mode. Host cells secrete full antibody and display Fc/antigen-binding fragments on the cell surface. This method utilizes an Fc fusion (e.g., fused at the N- or C-terminus) with a cell surface protein as “bait” that is covalently coupled to the cell surface (e.g., the cell wall) or embedded (partially or fully) in the cell membrane (e.g., as a transmembrane protein) and that is co-expressed with an antibody (e.g., a single specific antibody from a clonal source or an antibody from a library). In the endoplasmic reticulum, where antibody molecules normally dimerize to form the full antibody molecule, a surface anchored Fc fusion “bait” heterodimerizes with a monovalent antibody fragment creating a complex that is displayed on the cell surface. Monovalent antibody fragments on the cell surface can bind antigen.

The antibody system of the present invention can be employed in any host cell (e.g., yeast, mammalian cells, bacteria) wherein a bait can be expressed on the host cell surface and an Fc/antigen-binding fragment can bind to the bait.

Homodimerization of full antibody still occurs allowing secretion of full antibody molecules into the culture supernatant. The secreted full antibody can be used, e.g., for preclinical studies, e.g., after isolation.

If desired, bait can be knocked-out or mutated or its expression can be turned off to create a strain producing only the full antibody.

### Molecular Biology

In accordance with the present invention there may be employed conventional molecular biology, microbiology, and recombinant DNA techniques within the skill of the art. Such techniques are explained fully in the literature. See, e.g., Sambrook, Fritsch & Maniatis, Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, Second Edition (1989) Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y. (herein “Sambrook, et al., 1989”); DNA Cloning: A Practical Approach, Volumes I and II (D. N. Glover ed. 1985); Oligonucleotide Synthesis (M. J. Gait ed. 1984); Nucleic Acid Hybridization (B. D. Hames & S. J. Higgins eds. (1985)); Transcription And Translation (B. D. Barnes & S. J. Higgins, eds. (1984)); Animal Cell Culture (R. I. Freshney, ed. (1986)); Immobilized Cells And Enzymes (IRL Press, (1986)); B. Perbal, A Practical Guide To Molecular Cloning (1984); F. M. Ausubel, et al. (eds.), Current Protocols in Molecular Biology, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (1994).

A library is, typically, a collection of related but diverse polynucleotides that are, in general, in a common vector backbone. For example, a light chain or heavy chain immunoglobulin library may contain polynucleotides, in a common vector backbone, that encode light and/or heavy chain immunoglobulins which are diverse but related in their nucleotide sequence; for example, which immunoglobulins are functionally diverse in their abilities to form complexes with other immunoglobulins, e.g., in an antibody display system of the present invention, and bind a particular antigen.

A coding sequence is “under the control of”, “functionally associated with” or “operably associated with” transcriptional and translational control sequences in a cell when the sequences direct RNA polymerase mediated transcription of the coding sequence into RNA, preferably mRNA, which then may be spliced (if it contains introns) and translated into a protein encoded by the coding sequence. Thus, a bait gene can be operably associated with a promoter, such as a regulatable promoter or a constitutive promoter.

Polynucleotides discussed herein form part of the present invention. A “polynucleotide”, “nucleic acid” or “nucleic acid molecule” include DNA and RNA, single or double stranded.

Polynucleotides e.g., encoding an immunoglobulin chain or component of the antibody display system of the present invention (e.g., a bait), may, in an embodiment of the invention, be flanked by natural regulatory (expression control) sequences, or may be associated with heterologous sequences, including promoters, internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) and other ribosome binding site sequences, enhancers, response elements, suppressors, signal sequences, polyadenylation sequences, introns, and 3′-non-coding regions, and the like.

Polynucleotides e.g., encoding an immunoglobulin chain or component of the antibody display system of the present invention, may be operably associated with a promoter. A “promoter” or “promoter sequence” is, in an embodiment of the invention, a DNA regulatory region capable of binding an RNA polymerase in a cell (e.g., directly or through other promoter-bound proteins or substances) and initiating transcription of a coding sequence. A promoter sequence is, in general, bounded at its 3′ terminus by the transcription initiation site and extends upstream (5′ direction) to include the minimum number of bases or elements necessary to initiate transcription at any level. Within the promoter sequence may be found a transcription initiation site (conveniently defined, for example, by mapping with nuclease S1), as well as protein binding domains (consensus sequences) responsible for the binding of RNA polymerase. The promoter may be operably associated with other expression control sequences, including enhancer and repressor sequences or with a nucleic acid of the invention. Promoters which may be used to control gene expression include, but are not limited to, cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter (U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,385,839 and 5,168,062), the SV40 early promoter region (Benoist, at al., (1981) Nature 290:304-310), the promoter contained in the 3′ long terminal repeat of Rous sarcoma virus (Yamamoto, at al., (1980) Cell 22:787-797), the herpes thymidine kinase promoter (Wagner, at al., (1981) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78:1441-1445), the regulatory sequences of the metallothionein gene (Brinster, at al., (1982) Nature 296:39-42); prokaryotic expression vectors such as the β-lactamase promoter (ViIIa-Komaroff, et al., (1978) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 75:3727-3731), or the tac promoter (DeBoer, at al., (1983) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 80:21-25); see also “Useful proteins from recombinant bacteria” in Scientific American (1980) 242:74-94; and promoter elements from yeast or other fungi such as the Gal 4 promoter, the ADC (alcohol dehydrogenase) promoter, PGK (phosphoglycerol kinase) promoter or the alkaline phosphatase promoter.

The terms “vector”, “cloning vector” and “expression vector” include a vehicle (e.g., a plasmid) by which a DNA or RNA sequence can be introduced into a host cell, so as to transform the host and, optionally, promote expression and/or replication of the introduced sequence. Polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin chain or component of the antibody display system of the present invention (e.g., a bait) may, in an embodiment of the invention, be in a vector.

A host cell that may be used in a composition or method of the present invention, as is discussed herein, includes eukaryotes such a lower and higher eukaryotic cells as well as prokaryotics. Higher eukaryote cells include mammalian, insect (e.g., Spodoptera frugiperda cells), and plant cells (e.g., Protalix cells). In an embodiment of the invention, the host cell is a lower eukaryote such as a yeast or filamentous fungi cell, which, for example, is selected from the group consisting of any Pichia cell, Pichia pastoris, Pichia flnlandica, Pichia trehalophila, Pichia koclamae, Pichia membranaefaciens, Pichia minuta (Ogataea minuta, Pichia lindneri), Pichia opuntiae, Pichia thermotolerans, Pichia salictaria, Pichia guercuum, Pichia pijperi, Pichia stiptis, Pichia methanolica, Pichia, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Saccharomyces, Hanspnula polymorpha, Kluyveromyces, Kluyveromyces lactis, Candida albicans, Aspergillus nidulans, Aspergillus niger, Aspergillus oryzae, Trichoderma reesei, Chrysosporium lucknowense, Fusarium, Fusatum gramineum, Fusarium venenatum and Neuraspora crassa. A higher eukaryotic host cell includes a mammalian host cell for example a Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell, a BHK cell, or an NSO cell. A prokaryotic host cell can be, for example, a bacterial cell such as Escherichia, Enterobacter, Azotobacter, Erwinia, Bacillus, Pseudomonas, Klebsiella, Proteus, Salmonella, Serratia, Shigella, Rhizobia, Vitreoscilla, and Paracoccus. E. coli host cells include DHB4, BL21 (which are deficient in both Lon (Phillips et al. (1984) J. Bacteriol. 159: 283) and OmpT proteases), HB101, BL21 DE3, E. coli AD494, E. coli W3110 (ATCC 27,325), E. coli 294 (ATCC 31,446), E. coli. B, and E. coli X1776 (ATCC 31,537). Other strains include E. coli B834 which are methionine deficient (Leahy et al. (1992) Science 258, 987); other strains include the BLR strain, and the K-12 strains HMS174 and NovaBlue, which are recA-derivative that improve plasmid monomer yields and may help stabilize target plasmids containing repetitive sequences (these strains can be obtained from Novagen). See also U.S. Pat. Nos. 4,952,496, 5,693,489 and 5,869,320 and in Davanloo, P., et al., (1984) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81, 2035-2039; Studier, F. W., et al., (1986) J. Mol. Biol. 189: 113-130; Rosenberg, A. H., et al., (1987) Gene 56: 125-135; and Dunn, J. J., et al., (1988) Gene 68: 259. Prokaryotic cells can also be cultured, for example, in a medium under conditions allowing for recombinant expression of a polypeptide, such as an immunoglobulin polypeptide and/or a bait. Such methods and host cells comprising such genes and proteins are part of the present invention. A prokaryotic host cell can also be used as a host cell in the antibody display system of the present invention, as discussed herin.

As used herein, the terms “N-glycan” and “glycoform” are used interchangeably and refer to an N-linked oligosaccharide, e.g., one that is attached by an asparagine-N-acetylglucosamine linkage to an asparagine residue of a polypeptide. N-linked glycoproteins contain an N-acetylglucosamine residue linked to the amide nitrogen of an asparagine residue in the protein. Predominant sugars found on glycoproteins are glucose, galactose, mannose, fucose, N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and sialic acid (e.g., N-acetyl-neuraminic acid (NANA)).

N-glycans have a common pentasaccharide core of Man3GlcNAc2 (“Man” refers to mannose; “Glc” refers to glucose; and “NAc” refers to N-acetyl; GlcNAc refers to N-acetylglucosamine). N-glycans differ with respect to the number of branches (antennae) comprising peripheral sugars (e.g., GlcNAc, galactose, fucose and sialic acid) that are added to the Man3GlcNAc2 (“Man3”) core structure which is also referred to as the “triammnose core”, the “pentasaccharide core” or the “paucimannose core”. N-glycans are classified according to their branched constituents (e.g., high mannose, complex or hybrid). A “high mannose” type N-glycan has five or more mannose residues. A “complex” type N-glycan typically has at least one GlcNAc attached to the 1,3 mannose arm and at least one GlcNAc attached to the 1,6 mannose arm of a “trimannose” core. Complex N-glycans may also have galactose (“Gal”) or N-acetylgalactosamine (“GalNAc”) residues that are optionally modified with sialic acid or derivatives (e.g., “NANA” or “NeuAc”, where “Neu” refers to neuraminic acid and “Ac” refers to acetyl). Complex N-glycans may also have intrachain substitutions comprising “bisecting” GlcNAc and core fucose (“Fuc”). Complex N-glycans may also have multiple antennae on the “trimannose core,” often referred to as “multiple antennary glycans.” A “hybrid” N-glycan has at least one GlcNAc on the terminal of the 1,3 mannose arm of the trimannose core and zero or more mannoses on the 1,6 mannose arm of the trimannose core. The various N-glycans are also referred to as “glycoforms.” “PNGase”, or “glycanase” or “glucosidase” refer to peptide N-glycosidase F (EC 3.2.2.18).

In an embodiment of the invention, O-glycosylation of glycoproteins in a “eukaryotic host cell” is controlled. The scope of the present invention includes isolated eukaryotic host cells (e.g., Pichia pastoris) wherein O-glycosylation is controlled (as discussed herein) as well as antibody display systems comprising such eukaryotic host cells and methods of use thereof (as discussed herein). For example, wherein O-glycan occupancy and mannose chain length are reduced. In lower eukaryote host cells such as yeast, O-glycosylation can be controlled by deleting the genes encoding one or more protein O-mannosyltransferases (Dol-PMan: Protein (Ser/Thr) Mannosyl Transferase genes) (PMTs) or by growing the host in a medium containing one or more Pmtp inhibitors. Thus, the present invention includes isolated eukaryotic host cells, antibody display systems and methods of use thereof (as is discussed herein), e.g., comprising a deletion of one or more of the genes encoding PMTs, and/or, e.g., wherein the host cell can be cultivated in a medium that includes one or more Pmtp inhibitors. Pmtp inhibitors include but are not limited to a benzylidene thiazolidinedione. Examples of benzylidene thiazolidinediones are 5-[[3,4bis(phenylmethoxy)phenyl]methylene]-4-oxo-2-thioxo-3-thiazolidineacetic Acid; 5-[[3-(1-25 Phenylethoxy)-4-(2-phenylethoxy)]phenyl]methylene]-4-oxo-2-thioxo-3-thiazolidineacetic Acid; and 5-[[3-(1-Phenyl-2-hydroxy)ethoxy)-4-(2-phenylethoxy))phenyl]methylene]-4-oxo-2-thioxo3-thiazolidineacetic acid.

In an embodiment of the invention, a “eukaryotic host cell” includes a nucleic acid that encodes an alpha-1,2-mannosidase that has a signal peptide that directs it for secretion. For example, in an embodiment of the invention, the host cell is engineered to express an exogenous alpha-1,2-mannosidase enzyme having an optimal pH between 5.1 and 8.0, preferably between 5.9 and 7.5. In an embodiment of the invention, the exogenous enzyme is targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum or Golgi apparatus of the host cell, where it trims N-glycans such as Man8GlcNAc2 to yield Man3GlcNAc2. See U.S. Pat. No. 7,029,872.

The scope of the present invention includes such an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia pastoris) as well as antibody display systems comprising such eukaryotic host cells and methods of use thereof (as discussed herein).

“Eukaryotic host cells” are, in an embodiment of the invention, lower eukaryote cells (e.g., yeast such as Pichia pastoris) that are genetically engineered to eliminate glycoproteins having alpha-mannosidase-resistant N-glycans by deleting or disrupting one or more of the beta-mannosyltransferasegenes (e.g., BMT1, BMT2, BMT3, and BMT4) (See, U.S. Published Patent Application No. 2006/0211085) or abrogating translation of RNAs encoding one or more of the beta-mannosyltransferasesusinginterfering RNA, antisense RNA, or the like. The scope of the present invention includes such an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia pastoris) as well as antibody display systems comprising such eukaryotic host cells and methods of use thereof (as discussed herein).

“Eukaryotic host cells” also include lower eukaryote cells (e.g., yeast and filamentous fungi such as Pichia pastoris) that are genetically engineered to eliminate glycoproteins having phosphomannose residues, e.g., by deleting or disrupting one or both of the phosphomannosyl transferase genes PNO1 and MNN4B (See for example, U.S. Pat. Nos. 7,198,921 and 7,259,007), which can include deleting or disrupting the MNN4A gene or abrogating translation of RNAs encoding one or more of the phosphomannosyltransferases using interfering RNA, antisense RNA, or the like. In an embodiment of the invention, a “eukaryotic host cell” has been genetically modified to produce glycoproteins that have predominantly an N-glycan selected from the group consisting of complex N-glycans, hybrid N-glycans, and high mannose N-glycans wherein complex N-glycans are, in an embodiment of the invention, selected from the group consisting of Man3GlcNAc2, GlcNAC(1-4)Man3GlcNAc2, NANA(1-4)GlcNAc(1-4)Man3GlcNAc2, and NANA(1-4)Gal(1-4)Man3GlcNAc2; hybrid N-glycans are, in an embodiment of the invention, selected from the group consisting of Man5GlcNAc2, GlcNAcMan5GlcNAc2, GalGlcNAcMan5GlcNAc2, and NANAGalGlcNAcMan5GlcNAc2; and high mannose N-glycans are, in an embodiment of the invention, selected from the group consisting of Man6GlcNAc2, Man7GlcNAc2, Mang81cNAc2, and Man9GlcNAc2. The scope of the present invention includes such an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia pastoris) as well as antibody display systems comprising such eukaryotic host cells and methods of use thereof (as discussed herein).

As used herein, the term “essentially free of” as it relates to lack of a particular sugar residue, such as fucose, or galactose or the like, on a glycoprotein, is used to indicate that the glycoprotein composition is substantially devoid of N-glycans which contain such residues. Expressed in terms of purity, essentially free means that the amount of N-glycan structures containing such sugar residues does not exceed 10%, and preferably is below 5%, more preferably below 1%, most preferably below 0.5%, wherein the percentages are by weight or by mole percent.

As used herein, a glycoprotein composition “lacks” or “is lacking” a particular sugar residue, such as fucose or galactose, when no detectable amount of such sugar residue is present on the N-glycan structures. For example, in preferred embodiments of the present invention, the glycoprotein compositions are produced by lower eukaryotic organisms, as discussed herein, and will “lack fucose,” because the cells of these organisms do not have the enzymes needed to produce fucosylated N-glycan structures. Thus, the term “essentially free of fucose” encompasses the term “lacking fucose.” However, a composition may be “essentially free of fucose” even if the composition at one time contained fucosylated N-glycan structures or contains limited, but detectable amounts of fucosylated N-glycan structures as described above.

For example, a host cell which introduces, eliminates or modifies sugar residues on an immunoglobulin expressed in the host cell, e.g., as is discussed herein, may, in certain instances, be referred to herein as a “controlled glycosylation host cell.”

Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) is a specialized type of flow cytometry. It provides a method for sorting a heterogeneous mixture of biological cells into two or more containers, one cell at a time, based upon the specific light scattering and fluorescent characteristics of each cell. During the cell sorting process, the cell suspension is entrained in the center of a narrow, rapidly flowing stream of liquid. The flow is arranged so that there is a separation between cells relative to their diameter. A vibrating mechanism causes the stream of cells to break into individual droplets. The system is adjusted so that there is a low probability of more than one cell per droplet. Just before the stream breaks into droplets, the flow passes through a fluorescence measuring station where the fluorescent character of interest of each cell is measured. An electrical charging ring is placed just at the point where the stream breaks into droplets. A charge is placed on the ring based on the immediately-prior fluorescence intensity measurement, and the opposite charge is trapped on the droplet as it breaks from the stream. The charged droplets then fall through an electrostatic deflection system that diverts droplets into containers based upon their charge. In some systems, the charge is applied directly to the stream, and the droplet breaking off retains charge of the same sign as the stream. The stream is then returned to neutral after the droplet breaks off. The present invention encompasses methods of using the antibody display system of the present invention, e.g., as discussed herein, wherein the eukaryotic host cells that are bound to an antigen of interest (by the Fc/antigen-binding fragment) are sorted from unbound cells or cells without sufficient levels of binding, by FACS sorting, based on whether the cells are labeled with a detectable fluorescent label (e.g., wherein the antigen itself or a secondary antibody is labeled). Such sorted labeled host cells and compositions comprising such sorted labeled host cells are also part of the present invention.

A regulatable promoter is a promoter whose expression can be induced or inhibited. Embodiments of the invention include the antibody display system wherein expression of the bait is controlled by a regulatable promoter as well as methods of use thereof as discussed herein. Polynucleotides encoding the bait, operably associated with a regulatable promoter also form part of the present invention along with isolated eukaryotic host cells including the polynucleotides. Examples of regulatable promoters that occur in yeast include the GUT1 promoter, GADPH promoter and the PCK1 promoter.

In an embodiment of the invention, expression of a polynucleotide (e.g., the bait) in a eukaryotic host cell (e.g., a bait) is inhibited by exposing the cells to anti-sense RNA or by RNA interference (e.g., microRNA (miRNA) or small interfering RNA (siRNA)). Embodiments of the invention include methods of using antibody display system (e.g., as discussed herein) wherein expression of the bait is inhibited by RNA interference or anti-sense RNA. Isolated eukaryotic host cells of the present invention (e.g., as discussed herein) comprising bait and further comprising an anti-sense or RNA interference molecule that inhibits bait expression are part of the present invention.

**Antibodies**

Antibodies or antigen-binding fragments thereof identified in connection with use of the present invention (e.g., use of the antibody display system of the present invention) may be reformatted into any suitable form. For example, CDRs from a full antibody isolated using the antibody display system can be incorporated into a different framework (e.g., a human framework) to generate a distinct antibody or antigen-binding fragment comprising the CDRs isolated from the antibody display system of the present invention. Methods for producing chimeric, humanized and human antibodies are well known in the art. See, e.g., U.S. Pat. No. 5,530,101, issued to Queen at al., U.S. Pat. No. 5,225,539, issued to Winter et al., U.S. Pat. No. 4,816,397 issued to Boss at al. Such methods for reformatting an antibody or antigen-binding fragment or for relocating CDRs from one framework to another are conventional and well known in the art. For example, the CDRs of an antibody or antigen-binding fragment can be used to generate monoclonal antibodies, polyclonal antibodies, bispecific antibodies, chimeric antibodies, recombinant antibodies, anti-idiotypic antibodies, humanized antibodies and bispecific antibodies; or antigen-binding fragments thereof such as nanobodies, Fab, Fab′, F(ab′)2, Fv fragments; dsFv; (dsFv)2, ds diabodies; dsFv-dsFv′; single-chain antibody molecules, e.g., sc-Fv, sc-Fv dimers (bivalent diabodies); and bispecific diabodies.

A full antibody comprises a tetramer of subunits. Each tetramer has two identical pairs of polypeptide chains, each pair having one “light” chain (LC) (about 25 kDa) and one “heavy” chain (HC) (about 50-70 kDa). The amino-terminal portion of each chain includes a variable region of about 100 to 110 or more amino acids primarily responsible for antigen recognition. The carboxy-terminal portion of each chain defines a constant domain, in part, responsible for effector function. Light chains (LCs) are classified as either kappa or lambda based on the type of constant domain in the light chain. Heavy chains (HCs) are classified as gamma, mu, alpha, delta, or epsilon, based on the type of constant domain in the heavy chain, and define the antibody's isotype as IgG (e.g., IgG1, IgG2, IgG2a, IgG2b, IgG3 or IgG4), IgM, IgA (e.g., IgA1 or IgA2), IgD or IgE, respectively.

The present invention encompasses methods for making an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising introducing, into an isolated host cell (e.g., a eukaryotic host cell such as Pichia, e.g., Pichia pastoris) comprising a bait that includes a human Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof (e.g., human; e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, CH2-CH3 or CH3 polypeptide) fused to a surface anchor polypeptide or functional fragment thereof, one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin light chain variable region; and/or one or more polynucleotides encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain variable region and culturing the host cell under condition whereby the polynucleotides encoding the immunoglobulin chains are expressed and an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof is formed from said chains.

In an embodiment of the invention, said bait is operably associated with a regulatable promoter and the bait expression is inhibited when said immunoglobulin chains are expressed. In an embodiment of the invention, bait expression is inhibited with anti-sense RNA or by RNA interference.

The present invention also provides a method for determining the quantity of an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof, e.g., by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). For example, in an embodiment of the invention, the method comprises culturing a eukaryotic host cell comprising an isolated polypeptide comprising a bait polypeptide (Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof (e.g., human; e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, CH2-CH3 or CH3 polypeptide) fused to a surface anchor polypeptide or functional fragment thereof); wherein the host cell secretes full antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof (optionally, the antibody or fragment is isolated from the host cell and/or culture medium); and determining the quantity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof by ELISA. In an embodiment of the invention, expression of the bait is inhibited before quantitation such that the host cell expresses and secretes only full antibody. Bait polynucleotide can be operably associated with a regulatable promoter which is inhibited so as to inhibit bait expression. For example, in an embodiment of the invention, ELISA comprises coating the antigen on a solid substrate; binding the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof to the antigen; binding a detectably labeled secondary antibody to the antibody or fragment; and detecting the secondary antibody. In an embodiment of the invention, the secondary antibody is labeled with alkaline phosphatase or horse radish peroxidase. In an embodiment of the invention, the label is detected by binding the alkaline phosphatase (AP) or horse radish peroxidase (HRP) with substrate and measuring absorbance of the plate (e.g., HRP substrate 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB); HRP substrate 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB); or HRP substrate 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulphonic acid) (ABTS); or AP substrate para-nitrophenylphosphate).

The present invention also provides a method for determining the affinity of an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof, that is secreted from a eukaryotic host cell in the antibody display system of the present invention, for an antigen. For example, the affinity can be determined by standard affinity ELISA, Biacore analysis or competition assays.

**Antibody Display System**

The present invention provides an antibody display system, composition or kit comprising (1) a eukaryotic host cell and (2) a bait comprising an Fc (e.g., a human Fc, e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, a CH3, or a CH2-CH3 polypeptide) fused, at the N- or C-terminus, (optionally, by a peptide linker such as GGG) to a surface anchor which bait is optionally linked to a signal sequence (e.g., an alpha mating factor signal sequence, e.g., from Saccharomyces cerevisiae); which system may be used, for example, in the identification of antibodies. Thus, in an embodiment of the invention, the host cell in the system expresses one or more immunoglobulin chains (e.g., light and heavy chains, e.g., wherein one or more of the chains are from a library source) of an antibody and/or of an Fc/antigen-binding fragment thereof. In an embodiment of the invention, the immunoglobulin chains of an antibody and/or of an Fc/antigen-binding fragment thereof comprises an identical or different CH2-CH3 polypeptide from that of the bait.

An Fc/antigen-binding fragment of an antibody (1) complexes with the Fc moiety of the bait (e.g., a human Fc, e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, CH3 or CH2-CH3 polypeptide) and (2) binds to an antigen when complexed with the bait on the surface of the host cell. An example of an Fc/antigen-binding fragment is a monovalent fragment of a full antibody (i.e., a monovalent antibody fragment). In an embodiment of the invention, the bait comprises a CH2-CH3 polypeptide or functional fragment thereof that differs at one or more residues from the CH2-CH3 of the Fc/antigen-binding fragment of an antibody. In such an embodiment of the invention, when the bait and the Fc/antigen-binding fragment of an antibody bind, a heterodimeric Fc domain is formed.

A “monovalent antibody fragment” comprises one half of an antibody, i.e., the antibody heavy chain (VH—CH1-CH2-CH3) bound to the antibody light chain (VL-CL) comprising three paired CDRs, e.g., wherein CH1 and CL are bound by a disulfide bridge, which monovalent antibody fragment is capable of detectably binding an antigen.

The “bait” comprises an Fc domain (e.g., human, rat, rabbit, goat or mouse Fc, e.g., any part of the heavy chain (e.g., human, rat, rabbit, goat or mouse) such as, for example, a CH3 polypeptide, a VH—CH1 polypeptide or a CH2-CH3 polypeptide) fused, e.g., at the amino-terminus or carboxy-terminus, to a surface anchor, which bait possesses functional properties described herein (e.g., as set forth below) that enable the bait to function in the antibody display system of the present invention. The Fc domain can, in an embodiment of the invention, be mutated so as to improve its ability to function in the antibody display system of the present invention, for example, cysteines or other residues may be added or moved to allow for more extensive disulfide bridges to form when complexed with a human IgG Fc or Fc/antigen-binding fragment. An Fc suitable for use in the bait comprises an Fc (i.e., comprising the CH1 and/or CH2 and/or CH3 domains) or functional fragment thereof (e.g., from an IgG1, IgG2, IgG3 or IgG4 or a mutant thereof) that is capable of dimerizing, when fused to a surface anchor protein, with, for example, a human IgG Fc or with the Fc/antigen-binding fragment on the surface of a eukaryotic host cell. In an embodiment of the invention, the term “Fc” refers to the “fragment crystallized” C-terminal region of an antibody containing the CH2 and CH3 domains. In an embodiment of the invention, dimerization between the bait Fc and the Fc/antigen-binding fragment occurs intracellularly, prior to routing to the cell surface, wherein the Fc and an Fc/antigen-binding fragment remain associated once at the cell surface. In general, in the absence of the Fc/antigen-binding fragment, the bait homodimerizes; thus comprising two surface anchors and two Fc domains. In an embodiment of the invention, a full antibody that is co-expressed with the bait comprises light and heavy chains capable of dimerizing with each other to form a monovalent antibody fragment, which monovalent antibody fragment dimerizes with the Fc of the bait.

An antigen can be any immunogenic molecule or substance, for example, a polypeptide (e.g., an oligopeptide), a cell membrane, cell extract or a whole cell. Polypeptide antigens include, for example, the following polypeptides: chemokines, cytokines (e.g., inflammatory cytokines or chemokines), receptors, PCSK9, granulocyte-CSF; coagulation factors such as factor VIII, factor IX, and human protein C; soluble IgE receptor alpha-chain; urokinase; chymase and urea trypsin inhibitor; IGF-binding protein; insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor, vascular epidermal growth factor, epidermal growth factor; growth hormone-releasing factor; GITR (glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related protein), annexin V fusion protein; IL-23p19, IL-23p40, IL-23R, ILI2R-beta 1, TNF alpha (tumor necrosis factor alpha), TGF beta (transforming growth factor beta), IL-10, IL-17, TSLP (Thymic stromal lymphopoietin), angiostatin; vascular endothelial growth factor-2; myeloid progenitor inhibitory factor-1; osteoprotegerin (OPG), RANK (receptor activator for nuclear factor kappa B) or RANKL (receptor activator for nuclear factor kappa B ligand); any of which can be, in an embodiment of the invention, human.

A “surface anchor” is any polypeptide that, when fused with an Fc or functional fragment thereof, is expressed and located to the cell surface where an Fc/antigen-binding fragment can complex with the Fc or functional fragment thereof. An example of a cell surface anchor is a protein such as, but not limited to, SED-1, α-agglutinin, Cwp1, Cwp2, Gas1, Yap3, FIoIp1 Crh2, Pir1, Pir4, Tip1, Wpi, Hpwp1, Als3, and Rbt5; for example, Saccharomyces cerevisiae CWP1, CWP2, SED1, or GAS1; Pichia pastoris SP1 or GAS1; or H. polymorpha TIP1. In an embodiment of the invention, the surface anchor is any glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored (GPI) protein. A functional fragment of a surface anchor comprises a fragment of a full surface anchor polypeptide that is capable of forming a functional bait when fused to an Fc or functional fragment thereof; e.g., wherein the fragment, when expressed in a eukaryotic host cell as a Fc fusion, is located on the cell surface wherein the Fc is capable of forming a complex with an Fc/antigen-binding fragment (e.g., a monovalent antibody fragment).

As discussed herein, a suitable eukaryotic host cell for use in the antibody display system of the present invention is a Pichia cell such as Pichia pastoris.

The scope of the present invention encompasses an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia pastoris) comprising a bait (i.e., comprising the human Fc domain or functional fragment thereof fused, e.g., at the amino-terminus or carboxy-terminus, to the surface anchor or functional fragment thereof) on the cell surface wherein the bait is dimerized with an Fc/antigen-binding fragment, e.g., by binding between the bait Fc and the heavy chain of a monovalent antibody fragment (e.g., between the CH2-CH3 polypeptides in the bait and the Fc/antigen-binding fragment). The present invention also includes a composition comprising a eukaryotic host cell comprising a bait and secreted antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof and/or Fc/antigen-binding fragment thereof, e.g., in a liquid culture medium.

The present invention provides, for example, a method for identifying (i) an antibody or Fc/antigen-binding fragment thereof that binds specifically to an antigen of interest and/or (ii) a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain of said antibody or fragment and/or a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin light chain of said antibody or fragment. The method comprises, in an embodiment of the invention:

(a) co-expressing a bait (e.g., comprising a polypeptide comprising a CH3, VH—CH1 or CH2-CH3 polypeptide that is linked to a cell surface anchor, such as SED1) and one or more heavy and light immunoglobulin chains (e.g., wherein one or more of such chains are encoded by a polynucleotide from a library source) in an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia pastoris) such that a complex between the Fc moiety of the bait (e.g., comprising a VH—CH1, CH3 or CH2-CH3 polypeptide) and an Fc/antigen-binding fragment (e.g., a monovalent antibody fragment) comprising the immunoglobulin chains forms, and is located at the cell surface; for example, wherein the host cell is transformed with one or more polynucleotides encoding the bait and the immunoglobulin chains;

(b) identifying a eukaryotic host cell expressing the bait, dimerized with the Fc/antigen-binding fragment of the antibody (e.g., a monovalent antibody fragment), which has detectable affinity (e.g., acceptable affinity) for the antigen (e.g., which detectably binds to the antigen); for example, wherein the bait, and light and heavy chain immunoglobulins are encoded by the polynucleotides in the eukaryotic host cell;

In an embodiment of the invention, non-tethered, secreted full antibodies comprising light and heavy chain immunoglobulin variable domains identical to those complexed with the bait (e.g., immunoglobulins that are expressed from the host cell) are analyzed to determine if they possess detectable affinity.

In an embodiment of the invention, the full antibodies are secreted from the host cell into the medium. In an embodiment of the invention, the full antibodies are isolated from the host cell.

In an embodiment of the invention, after step (b), expression of the bait in the host cell is inhibited, but expression of the full antibodies is not inhibited. In this embodiment of the invention, the host cell expresses only the full antibody but does not express the bait at any significant quantity. Once expression of the bait is inhibited, in an embodiment of the invention, the full antibody produced from the host cell is analyzed to determine if it possesses detectable affinity (e.g., acceptable affinity); and,

(c) identifying said antibodies or antigen-binding fragments or polynucleotides if detectable binding of the Fc/antigen-binding fragment is observed, e.g., wherein one or more of the polynucleotides encoding the light and/or heavy chain immunoglobulin are optionally isolated from the host cell. In an embodiment of the invention, the nucleotide sequence of the polynucleotide is determined.

In an embodiment of the invention, a population of host cells express a common bait and a common immunoglobulin heavy chain as well a variety of different light chain immunoglobulins, e.g., from a library source, wherein individual light chain immunoglobulins that form Fc/antigen-binding fragments and full antibodies that are tethered to the bait and which exhibit antigen binding can be identified. Similarly, in an embodiment of the invention, a population of host cells express a common bait and a common immunoglobulin light chain as well a variety of different heavy chain immunoglobulins, e.g., from a library source, wherein individual heavy chain immunoglobulins that form Fc/antigen-binding fragments and full antibodies that are tethered to the bait and which exhibit antigen binding can be identified.

In an embodiment of the invention, the host cell possessing polynucleotides encoding the heavy and light chain immunoglobulins can be further used to express the secreted non-tethered antibody (e.g., full antibody) or an antigen-binding fragment thereof in culture. For example, in this embodiment of the invention, expression of the bait is optionally inhibited so that bait expression at significant quantities does not occur. The host cell is then cultured in a culture medium under conditions whereby secreted, non-tethered antibody (e.g., full antibody) or antigen-binding fragment thereof is expressed and secreted from the host cell. The non-tethered antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof can optionally be isolated from the host cell and culture medium. In an embodiment of the invention, the immunoglobulin chains are transferred to a separate host cell (e.g., lacking the antibody display system components) for recombinant expression.

The present invention provides, for example, a method for identifying (i) an antibody or Fc/antigen-binding fragment thereof that binds specifically to an antigen of interest which comprises a second CH2-CH3 that differs from a first CH2-CH3 of a bait at one or more residues or (ii) a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain of said antibody or fragment and/or a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin light chain of said antibody or fragment. The method comprises, in an embodiment of the invention:

(a) co-expressing a bait comprising a first CH2-CH3 polypeptide; along with a heavy immunoglobulin chain comprising said second CH2-CH3 polypeptide (e.g., wherein said heavy immunoglobulin chain is from a library source) and a light immunoglobulin chain (e.g., VL-CL), in an isolated eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia pastoris) such that a complex between the first CH2-CH3 polypeptide of the bait and the second CH2-CH3 polypeptide of a Fc/antigen-binding fragment binds and is located at the cell surface; for example, wherein the host cell is transformed with one or more polynucleotides encoding the bait and the immunoglobulin chains;

(b) identifying a eukaryotic host cell expressing the bait, dimerized with the Fc/antigen-binding fragment which has detectable affinity (e.g., acceptable affinity) for the antigen; for example, wherein the bait, and light and heavy chain immunoglobulins are encoded by the polynucleotides in the eukaryotic host cell; and, optionally,

(c) identifying said antibodies or antigen-binding fragments or polynucleotides if detectable binding of the Fc/antigen-binding fragment is observed, e.g., wherein one or more of the polynucleotides encoding the light and/or heavy chain immunoglobulin are optionally isolated from the host cell. In an embodiment of the invention, the nucleotide sequence of the polynucleotide is determined.

The antibody display system of the present invention may be use to evaluate the effects of a given glycosylation pattern on the affinity of an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof for an antigen. In general, the ability of the Fc/antigen-binding fragment comprising an altered glyosylation pattern may be evaluated for binding to the antigen, after which affinity of the full antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof can be evaluated. Glycosylation patterns can be modified on the immunoglobulin chains expressed in the antibody display system, for example, by using a host cell, e.g., as is discussed herein, that modifies the glycosylation patterns when the chains are expressed and/or by culturing a host under conditions whereby the glycosylation pattern is modified, e.g., as discussed herein. For example, in an embodiment of the invention, the method comprise contacting an antibody display system with said antigen; wherein the antibody display system comprises: (a) an isolated eukaryotic controlled glycosylation host cell comprising a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin light chain; and a polynucleotide encoding an immunoglobulin heavy chain; and (b) a bait comprising an Fc immunoglobulin domain or functional fragment thereof fused to a surface anchor polypeptide or functional fragment thereof on the surface of said eukaryotic host cell; wherein the Fc of said bait complexes with an Fc/antigen-binding fragment comprising said immunoglobulin heavy and immunoglobulin light chains on the surface of the host cell; wherein said heavy or light chain comprises said sugar; determining if said Fc/antigen-binding fragment specifically binds to said antigen; determining the binding affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising said sugar for the antigen; and comparing the affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof with affinity of an otherwise identical antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof which lacks said sugar; wherein the sugar is determined to increase affinity for the antigen if the affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising said sugar is higher than the affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof which lacks the sugar, and/or wherein the sugar is determined to decrease affinity for the antigen if the affinity of antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising said sugar is lower than the affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof which lacks the sugar. For example, the affinity of the antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof lacking the sugar can be determined in a similar manner in the antibody display system of the present invention or the affinity or it can be determined directly by measuring affinity by a known method such as ELISA, biacore assay or a competition assay.

Bait expression can be inhibited by any of several acceptable means. For example, the polynucleotides encoding the bait (e.g., the surface anchor and/or Fc) can be expressed by a regulatable promoter whose expression can be inhibited in the host cell. In an embodiment of the invention, bait expression is inhibited by RNA interference, anti-sense RNA, mutation or removal of the polynucleotide encoding the bait (e.g., surface anchor and/or Fc) from the host cell or genetic mutation of the polynucleotide so that the host cell does not express a functional bait.

“Acceptable affinity” refers to antibody or antigen-binding fragment affinity for the antigen which is at least 10−3 M or a greater affinity (lower number), e.g., 10−3 M, 10−4 M, 10−5 M, 10−6 M, 10−7 M, 10−8 M, 10−9 M, 10−10 M, 10−11 M or 10−12 M.

In an embodiment of the present invention, polynucleotides encoding the antibody or Fc/antigen-binding fragment (e.g., monovalent antibody fragment) heavy and light chain are in one or more libraries of polynucleotides that encode light and/or heavy chain immunoglobulins (e.g., one library encoding light chains and one library encoding heavy chains). The particular immunoglobulin chains of interest are, in this embodiment, distinguished from the other chains in the library when the surface-anchored Fc/antigen-binding fragment on the host cell surface is observed to bind to an antigen of interest.

In an embodiment of the invention, the heavy or light chain immunoglobulin expressed in the antibody display system is from a library source and the other immunoglobulin chain is known (i.e., a single chain from a clonal source). In this embodiment of the invention, the antibody display system can be used, as discussed herein, to identify a new library chain that forms desirable antibodies or antigen-binding fragments thereof when coupled with the known chain. Alternatively, the antibody display system can be used to analyze expression and binding characteristics of an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising two known immunoglobulin chains.

In an embodiment of the invention, cells expressing Fc/antigen-binding fragments tethered to the cell by an anchor such as SED1 that bind to an antigen can be detected by incubating the cells with fluorescently labeled antigen (e.g., biotin label) and sorting/selecting cells that specifically bind the antigen by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS).

In an embodiment of the invention, the eukaryotic host cells expressing the bait dimerized with the Fc/antigen-binding fragment are identified and sorted using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). For example, in an embodiment of the invention, cells expressing the bait dimerized with the Fc/antigen-binding fragment on the cell surface are labeled with a fluorescent antigen or fluorescent secondary antibody that also binds to the antigen. The fluorescent label is detected during the FACS sorting and used as the signal for sorting. Labeled cells indicate the presence of a cell surface expressed bait/Fc/antigen-binding fragment/antigen complex and are collected in one vessel whereas cells not expressing signal are collected in a separate vessel. The present invention, accordingly, includes the a method comprising the following steps for determining if an antibody or antigen-binding fragment thereof from a library specifically binds to an antigen:


- - (1) Transform:
    - (i) one or more immunoglobulin libraries, containing
      polynucleotides encoding light and heavy chain immunoglobulins;
    - (ii) one or more immunoglobulin libraries, containing
      polynucleotides encoding light chain immunoglobulins and a single
      clonal heavy chain immunoglobulin; or
    - (iii) one or more immunoglobulin libraries, containing
      polynucleotides encoding heavy chain immunoglobulins and a single
      clonal light chain immunoglobulin;
    - wherein, said chains are capable of forming an antibody or
      antigen-binding fragment thereof, into a eukaryotic host cell
      comprising polynucleotides encoding the bait (e.g., *Pichia
      pastoris*);
  - (2) Grow transformed cells in a liquid culture medium;
  - (3) Allow expression of the bait on the surface of the cells;
  - (4) Label the cells with fluorescently labeled antigen or antigen
    bound to a fluorescently labeled secondary antibody;
  - (5) Sort and isolate fluorescently labeled cells using FACS for one
    round;
  - (6) Regrow the labeled, sorted cells;
  - (7) Allow expression of the bait in the cells;
  - (8) Label the cells with fluorescently labeled antigen or antigen
    bound to a fluorescently labeled secondary antibody;
  - (9) Sort and isolate fluorescently labeled cells using FACS for a
    second round;
  - (10) Regrow the labeled, sorted cells on solid culture medium so
    that individual cellular clones grow into discrete cellular
    colonies;
  - (11) Identify colonies with affinity for the antigen;
  - (12) Grow cells from identified colonies in a liquid culture medium
    and isolate supernatant containing full, non-tethered antibody or
    antigen-binding fragment thereof comprising the immunoglobulin light
    and heavy chains; wherein, expression of the bait is optionally
    inhibited;
  - (13) Determine affinity of non-tethered antibodies or
    antigen-binding fragments thereof, from the supernatant, for the
    antigen and identify clones with acceptable affinity (e.g., by
    Biacore analysis);
  - (14) Determine the nucleotide sequence of polynucleotides in the
    identified clones encoding the heavy and light chain
    immunoglobulins.

The scope of the present invention also includes a method for identifying polynucleotides encoding a heavy chain and light chain immunoglobulin of an antibody or for identifying an antibody which exhibits high stability. Such a method comprises the following steps:

(a) co-expressing the bait and the polynucleotides encoding the heavy and light chains in a eukaryotic host cell (e.g., Pichia pastoris) while subjecting antibodies comprising said chains to a denaturant;

In an embodiment of the invention, a denaturant is present in a concentration or amount or magnitude (e.g., at a sufficiently high temperature) that a practitioner of ordinary skill in the art would expect to, at least partially, denature an antibody and, thus, inhibit its ability to bind to an antigen. For example, possible denaturants include urea (e.g., 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 M or more), detergent such as triton X-100 (e.g., 1% or more), dithiothreitol (DTT) (e.g., 250 mM or 500 mM or more), guanidine hydrochloride, light (e.g., ultraviolet or visible), extreme pH (e.g., 1, 2, 3, 14, 13 or 12) or a temperature above about 4° C., such as 37° C. (e.g., 42° C., 48° C. or 50° C.) or any combination thereof (e.g., 500 mM DTT/6 M urea).

(b) identifying a eukaryotic host cell expressing the bait, dimerized with the Fc/antigen-binding fragment (e.g., a monovalent antibody fragment), which fragment has detectable affinity (e.g., acceptable affinity) for the antigen;

In an embodiment of the invention, full antibodies comprising light and heavy chain variable regions identical to those complexed with the bait are also analyzed to determine if they possess detectable affinity.

In an embodiment of the invention, the full antibodies are secreted from the host cell. In an embodiment of the invention, the full antibodies are isolated from the host cell.

In an embodiment of the invention, expression of the bait in the host cell is inhibited, but expression of the full antibodies is not inhibited. In this embodiment of the invention, the host cell expresses only the full antibody but does not express the bait at any significant quantity. Once expression of the bait is inhibited, in an embodiment of the invention, the full antibody produced from the host cell is analyzed to determine if it possesses detectable affinity (e.g., acceptable affinity).

; and,

(c) identifying said antibodies or polynucleotides encoding the heavy and light chains from the cell wherein one or more of the polynucleotides are optionally isolated from the host cell; wherein antibodies exhibiting affinity for the antigen in the presence of denaturant are determined to exhibit high stability. In an embodiment of the invention, the nucleotide sequence of the polynucleotide is determined.

In an embodiment of the invention, a human Fc immunoglobulin domain for use in a bait comprises the following amino acid sequence:

In an embodiment of the invention, SED1 comprises the following amino acid sequence:

In an embodiment of the invention, the human Fc immunoglobulin fused to the SED1 polypeptide is linked to a signal sequence such as an alpha mating factor signal sequence (e.g., MRFPSIFTAVLFAASSALA (SEQ ID NO: 3))

In an embodiment of the invention, the bait comprising the human Fc immunoglobulin domain fused to a SED1 polypeptide comprise the amino acid sequence:

The Fc immunoglobulin domain is underscored and the linked is in bold face font. The SED1 polypeptide follows the linker and an alpha mating factor signal peptide is before the Fc.

## EXAMPLES

The present invention is intended to exemplify the present invention and not to be a limitation thereof. The methods and compositions (e.g., polypeptides, polynucleotides, plasmids, yeast cells) disclosed below fall within the scope of the present invention.

### Example 1

**Construction and Use of Antibody Display System**

**Construction of Antibody Display Bait**

Expression cassettes were constructed as follows. A polynucleotide encoding the N-terminus of a cell surface anchoring protein that inherently contains an attached glycophosphotidylinositol (GPI) post-translational modification that anchors the protein on the yeast cell wall was linked to a nucleic acid sequence that encodes the human IgG1 Fc region. The specific cell surface anchoring protein we used was S. cerevisiae Sed1 protein, which had been identified by screening a panel of cell wall of plasma membrane proteins that had been identified using GPI protein prediction software (described in international publication no. WO09/111,183).

To create the plasmid containing bait cassette, a codon optimized sequence of human IgG1 Fc fragment was synthesized using an EcoRI forward PCR primer containing the nucleic acid sequence of S. cerevisiae α-mating factor signal sequence fused upstream of the sequence encoding the IgG1 Fc N-terminus, and a SalI reverse primer encoding the C-terminus of IgG1 Fc that terminates in a sequence encoding a GGGG linker. A plasmid containing the anti-Her2 gene sequence was used as a PCR template for amplification of an EcoRI-α-mating factor signal sequence-Fc-GGGG-SalI fragment. Both PCR product and pGLY3033 (described in international publication no. WO09/111,183) were digested using EcoRI and SalI endonucleases. The EcoRI-SalI fragment encoding the Fc was ligated in frame to EcoRI-SalI pGLY3033 backbone to generate plasmid pGLY9008 (FIG. 2). This plasmid enables delivery of the Fc-SED1 cassette under the control of the Pichia pastoris AOX1 promoter sequence. Like the parent plasmid it contains, the Pichia pastoris URA6 gene sequence, which serves as an integration locus in the genome, and the arsenite resistance gene, to allow selection on media containing sodium aresnite.

The pGLY3033 plasmid sequence comprises the nucleotide sequence:

The pGLY9008 plasmid sequence comprises the nucleotide sequence:

To test the capacity of this configuration for displaying monovalent antibody fragments (comprising human IgGs) (1 heavy chain immunoglobulin and 1 light chain immunoglobulin (H+L)) on the yeast cell wall, pGLY9008 was introduced into GFI 5.0 strains that have been selected previously as expression hosts of human anti-Her2 or anti-PCSK9 IgGs. An empty strain was included as a control (Table 1).

The glycoengineered Pichia pastoris monoclonal antibody production strains in Table 1 were grown in 50 mL BMGY media until the culture optical density, at 600 nm, was 2. The cells were washed three times with 1 M sorbitol and resuspended in 1 mL 1 M sorbitol. About 1-2 micrograms of SpeI linearized pGLY9008 was mixed with these competent cells. Transformation was performed with a BioRad electroporation apparatus using the manufacturer's program specific for electroporation of nucleic acids into Pichia pastoris. One mL recovery media was added to the cells, which were then plated out on yeast-soytone-dextrose (YSD) media with 50 μg/mL arsenite.

Growth and Induction of Fc-Monovalent Antibody Fragment (H+L) Displaying Yeast.

Glycoengineered yeast expressing human IgGs and the Fc-SED1 bait expression cassette were inoculated using 600 μL BMGY in a 96 deep well plate or 50 mL BMGY in a 250 mL shake flasks for two days. The cells were collected by centrifugation and the supernatant was discarded. The cells were induced by incubation in 300 μL or 25 mL BMMY with PMTi inhibitor overnight following the methods described in international application publication no. WO2007/061631. Following induction, culture supernatants were assayed for antibody expression using Kappa ELISA, according to the manufacturer's protocol, and Protein A capture SDS-PAGE analysis. The data in FIGS. 3a and b, respectively, describe the results of both of these assays. As outlined in FIG. 3, supernatants of cultures containing the Fc-Sed1 protein bait were found to contain similar levels of secreted full antibody molecules (2 heavy chain immunoglobulins and 2 light chain immunoglobulins ((H2+L2)) compared to their parent strains (containing no Fc-Sedlp). This indicated that the presence of the Fc-Sedlp bait did not interfere with the yeast ability to secret full IgG antibodies (H2+L2).

To determine the efficiency of surface displaying antibodies using this method, cells were labeled with APC 635 labeled mouse anti-Human Kappa, which detects the light chain of human antibody molecules, and were processed by flow cytometry. Briefly, each culture, after growth to an optical density, at 600 nm, of 2, was pelleted by centrifugation and washed in 100 μL PBS. Cells were incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature (RT) in 100 μL phosphate buffer saline (PBS) containing fluorescently labeled (APC635) mouse anti-human Kappa light chain and washed in 100 μl PBS. One hundred microliters of PBS was used to resuspend pellets before analyzing in a flow cytometer.

Flow cytometry analysis was conducted using the cells co-expressing Fc-Sedlp bait and anti-Her2, or Fc-Sedlp bait and anti-PCSK9. Controls were prepared in which an empty strain expressing Fc-Sedlp bait only or a strain that expressed full length antibody (H2+L2) without the Fc-Sedlp. Strains co-expressing anti-Her2 or anti-PCSK9 with the Fc-Sedlp bait were found to display significant levels of anti-Kappa binding while strains lacking the Fc-Sedlp bait showed background signal levels. In FIG. 4a-c, the fluorescent intensities from these experiments were compared. The Figure shows these different fluorescence intensities between the anti-Her2 displaying cells and the anti-PCSK9 displaying cells, and the parent strains that did not contain the Fc-Sedlp bait. It is noteworthy to mention that anti-Her2 displaying cells showed higher fluorescence intensity than the anti-PCSK9 displaying cells. These results were in congruence with what was known regarding expression levels of these two antibodies.

To establish the utility of this method for separating antibody mixtures, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) of a mixture of cells displaying Fc-Sedlp anti-PCSK9 monovalent antibody fragment (H+L) (strain YGLY21610) and Fc-Sedlp anti-Her2 (H+L) (strain YGLY21614) was performed as follows. The cells displaying anti-PCSK9 (H+L) and cells displaying anti-Her2 (H+L) were mixed together in the following ratio 1:0; 0:1; and 1:100. Cells were dually labeled with goat anti-human Fc Alexa 488 and 100 nM biotinylated PCSK9 and APC 635 labeled Streptavidin. FIG. 5 shows that Fc-Sedlp/anti-PCSK9 (H+L) was able to bind biotinylated PCSK9 while Fc-Sedlp/anti-Her2 (H+L) was not. Both strains reacted with anti-human Fc Alexa 488 antibody. Two separate populations of cells were visible when cells from both cultures were mixed at a 1:100 ratio of Fc-Sedlp anti-PCSK9 displaying cells (circled) to Fc-Sedlp anti-Her2 displaying cells. The number of PCSK9 binders in this mixture was in agreement with the 1:100 ratio, thus lending further support for the robustness of this method in screening antibodies with desired antigen-binding.

The above experiments demonstrated that the Fc-Sedlp antibody display system can be used to display IgG monovalent antibody fragments (H+L) that retain specific antigen binding of their corresponding full antibody molecules (H2+L2) dimers. The next goal was to use this method to isolate and enrich for novel antibody molecules that can bind to any antigen of interest. To this end we took advantage of two recently constructed libraries. Library one was constructed by changing the sequence of the heavy chain of anti-PCSK9 antibody AX189 while marinating the original light chain sequence. This library had a diversity of about 2500 unique sequences and will be referred to as “BP550”. The second library was generated by maintaining the original AX189 heavy chain sequence and changing the light chain sequence. This library contained about 4000 unique sequences and will be referred to as “BP551”.

BP550 and BP551 were transformed as described previously into strain YGLY21605 (empty 5.0 strain carrying pGLY9008-expressing Fc-Sed1p) and plated out on YSD containing 300 micrograms per milliliter zeocin. Approximately, 50,000 colonies were obtained for each transformation, thus providing ample statistical coverage of all possible sequences in the libraries. The colonies resulting from transforming the two libraries were scraped off the solid media and inoculated separately in 250 mL shake flasks containing 50 mL of YSG liquid medium with 300 μ/mL zeocin. The cultures were passaged 3 times by re-inoculating 1 mL of each culture into the fresh selective liquid media (YSG+zeocin). The third passages were allowed to grow to saturation in YSG media and induced in 25 mL BMMY with PMTi inhibitor (PMTi4: L000001772; at a concentration of 1 micrograms/ml) overnight following the methods described in international patent publication no. WO2007/061631. Strains YGLY21610 (Fc-Sedlp anti-PCSK9 (AX189)) and YGLY21614 (Fc-Sedlp anti-Her2) were included as positive and negative controls, respectively.

After 24 hours of induction, each of the four cultures were grown to an optical density, at 600 nm, of 2. Pellets were collected by centrifugation and washed with 100 μL 1×PBS then labeled in 100 μL PBS containing anti-Kappa Alexa 488 and 100 nM of biotin-PCSK9. Mixtures were incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes then washed with 100 μL PBS solution. Cells were incubated at room temperature with APC 635 labeled Streptavidin in 100 μL PBS for 10 minutes and washed 2× in PBS and submitted for FACS.

Using the flow cytometer dot plots generated with YGLY21610 and YGLY21614 as boundaries to gate potential binders, clones from 100,000 cells of populations of both libraries, BP550 and BP551, were sorted in a FACS sorter and collected in 5 mL YSG media. Cultures were allowed to recover by shaking at room temperature for 5 days. Sorting round 1 pools were re-inoculated in 50 mL YSG liquid media and the same process was repeated to induce and label the cultures. Another round of sorting (round 2) was conducted on the round 1 pool and cells were collected as above and induced. To obtain single colonies, 1000 cells of both two-round sorted populations (BP550 and BP551) were plated out of solid media and were analyzed by Kappa ELISA and PCSK9 affinity ELISA to determine protein titer and binding affinities for PCSK9, respectively.

Additionally, a yeast colony PCR amplification reaction was performed to amplify heavy chain and light chain genes of the round 2 clones which were submitted for DNA sequence analysis.

As shown in FIG. 6, two rounds of sorting using biotinylated PCSK9 antigen resulted in significant enrichment of specific PCSK9 binders. The PCSK9 ELISA compared presorted library to round 2 sorted pools for both BP550 and BP551 (FIG. 7). Round 2 sorted pools from both libraries contained a high percentage of binders over the presorted populations. DNA sequencing confirmed the enrichment for new anti-PCSK9 binding sequences.

The present invention is not to be limited in scope by the specific embodiments described herein. Indeed, the scope of the present invention includes embodiments specifically set forth herein and other embodiments not specifically set forth herein; the embodiments specifically set forth herein are not necessarily intended to be exhaustive. Various modifications of the invention in addition to those described herein will become apparent to those skilled in the art from the foregoing description. Such modifications are intended to fall within the scope of the claims.

Patents, patent applications, publications, product descriptions, and protocols are cited throughout this application, the disclosures of which are incorporated herein by reference in their entireties for all purposes.

