# DESCRIPTION

## TECHNICAL FIELD

The present disclosure relates to a thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant and screening and fermentation methods thereof, and belongs to the field of gene engineering, enzyme engineering and fermentation engineering.

## BACKGROUND

L-asparaginase (E.C.3.5.1.1) can catalyze L-asparaginate to be deaminized to generate L-aspartic acid and ammonia. The L-asparaginase is mainly used in the pharmaceutical industry and the food industry. In the pharmaceutical industry, the L-asparaginase is used as one of therapeutic and anticancer drugs due to its inhibition effect on some tumors. L-asparaginase II separated and purified from E. coli, Erwinia chrysanthemi and E. carotovora has been widely applied to treating diseases such as acute lymphoblastic leukemia, lymphatic sarcoma and retothelial sarcoma. In the food industry, the L-asparaginase can reduce the content of the L-asparaginate which is a precursor substance of a cancerogenic substance, namely acrylamide, in food subjected to high-temperature treatment such as frying and baking, thereby reducing generation of the acrylamide from the source.

To obtain L-asparaginase which is more suitable for food and medical treatment, many researchers transform the L-asparaginase by measures of gene engineering, enzyme engineering and the like. Long et al. have found key amino acid residues that affect the activity of the L-asparaginase of bacillus subtilis. By mutation of these residues, the catalytic efficiency of this enzyme is improved (Enzyme Microb Technol, 82, 15-22). Offman et al. have obtained a mutant strain which is capable of resisting protease hydrolysis and has improved enzyme activity by building a new genetic algorithm and researching the partial flexibility and the molecular dynamics of the L-asparaginase. The two characteristics are both characteristics required by medical L-asparaginase (Blood, 117(5), 1614-21). Kotzia and Labrou have obtained a mutant strain with improved enzyme activity and thermal stability by performing staggered extension hybridization on L-asparaginase genes of E. carotovora and E. chrysanthemi through orthogenesis. A beneficial screening method can simplify a screening process and reduce the workload. Although there are many measures for distinguishing key amino acids and constructing a mutation library, few methods for screening the L-asparaginase have been reported. In the aspect of screening of the L-asparaginase, there is only one method, reported by Gulati et al., for screening the L-asparaginase on a flat plate by taking L-asparaginate as a unique carbon source and taking phenol red as a developing agent (Lett App Microbiol, 24(I), 23-6), but this method is not applicable to screening of intracellular enzymes and thermophilic L-asparaginase.

In the aspect of a research for producing the L-asparaginase by microorganism fermentation, a few to several hundred (U/mL) of L-asparaginase is produced through fermentation of different processes and hosts. Ferrara et al. make saccharomyces cerevisiae-derived L-asparaginase expressed in pichia pastoris. Then, when a mycelium biomass is up to 107 g·L−1 under high-density fermentation, an enzyme activity yield is up to 85.6 U/mL (Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 2006, 39(7): 1457-1463). Chityala et al. make P. carotovorum MTCC 1428-derived L-asparaginase expressed in B. subtilis WB800N, a final yield of the enzyme is up to 105 U/mL (Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering. 2015. 38(11): 2271-2284) by optimizing conditions such as a culturing temperature, a rotating speed, a concentration of an inducer and inducing time and adopting a continuous inducing strategy. Feng et al. make bacillus subtilis-derived L-asparaginase overexpressed in bacillus subtilis, and the enzyme activity yield in a 3 L fermentation tank is finally up to 407.6 U/mL (Appl Microbiol Biotechnol, 101(4), 1509-1520) through measures of signal peptide screening, promoter mutation and protein nitrogen end excision, and is the previously reported highest enzyme activity yield of the L-asparaginase expressed in a safe food strain. Amardeep et al. feed through an exponential fed-batch strategy, control a specific growth rate of E. coli thalli, and optimize the adding time of an inducer IPTG. Finally, when OD600 is 90, a yield of 870 U/mL of the L-asparaginase (Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 2005, 68(2): 189-197), which is the previously reported highest enzyme activity yield of the L-asparaginase is obtained. There are still rooms for improving the enzyme activity yield and the specific enzyme activity.

## SUMMARY

To solve the above-mentioned problems, the present disclosure builds a screening method for synchronous cell disruption and enzyme activity measurement. A mutation library of L-asparaginase of Pyrococcus yayanosii CH1 is constructed by using an error-prone PCR (epPCR) technology, thus obtaining a positive mutant, and a composite mutant strain with improved enzyme activity through site-directed mutation. By use of promoter replacement and RBS optimization, an expression quantity of an enzyme in bacillus subtilis 168 is increased. Finally, a gene of the composite mutant strain is efficiently fermented and produced through a culture medium optimization and pH and feeding coupling strategy.

A first objective of the present disclosure is to provide a thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant. An amino acid sequence of the mutant is SEQ ID NO.3 (S17G/E72D/N177D), SEQ ID NO.4 (A90S/I132L/R156S), SEQ ID NO.5 (L222V/K272A), SEQ ID NO.6 (S17G/W181F/K272A), SEQ ID NO.7 (S17G/A90S/R156S/V282S), SEQ ID NO.8 (R156S/K272A) or SEQ ID NO.9 (S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A).

A second objective of the present disclosure is to provide an encoding gene of the above-mentioned thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant.

A third objective of the present disclosure is to provide a recombinant expression vector containing the encoding gene of the above-mentioned thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant.

A fourth objective of the present disclosure is to provide a plasmid efficiently expressing the above-mentioned thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant. The plasmid is a recombinant expression plasmid obtained by linking the gene of the above-mentioned thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant between EcoR V and Hind III of pMA5 and linking a gene of a promoter P43 of the sequence, as shown in SEQ ID NO.10, between the site EcoR I and the site EcoR V of the pMA5.

In one implementation mode of the present disclosure, the plasmid is that an RBS sequence included in the promoter P43 is replaced with an RBS sequence, as shown in SEQ ID NO.11, of a nucleotide sequence.

A fifth objective of the present disclosure is to provide a genetically engineered bacterium expressing the above-mentioned thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant.

In one implementation mode of the present disclosure, the genetically engineered bacterium takes bacillus subtilis, escherichia coli or saccharomycetes as a host.

A sixth objective of the present disclosure is to provide a screening method of L-asparaginase. The method is applicable to screening of a thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant strain with high enzyme activity, and is implemented in a way of synchronous cell disruption and enzyme activity measurement.

In one implementation mode of the present disclosure, the screening method specifically includes: preheating a reaction solution (L-asparaginate, Tris-HCl, pH=7-9) in a baking oven with a temperature of 80 to 100° C. for 5 to 15 minutes; selecting a cultured mutation transformant single colony, inoculating the single colony into the preheated reaction solution, and heating the single colony in the baking oven with the temperature of 80 to 100° C. for 5 to 15 minutes; and adding a Nessler reagent for development, placing the single colony at a room temperature for 2 to 5 minutes, and measuring an absorbancy of the developed solution with an ELIASA under the condition of OD450.

In one implementation mode of the present disclosure, the screening method is used for screening the mutant according to claim 1.

A seventh objective of the present disclosure is to provide a fermentation method of the above-mentioned thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant. The method specifically includes: inoculating the thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant into a fermentation culture medium according to an inoculation amount of 5 to 10 percent, respectively linking a feeding culture medium and ammonia water at a concentration of 40 to 60 percent to acid and alkali inlets of a fermentation tank under fermentation conditions of 500 to 700 rpm and 2 to 6 vvm, setting the pH to 7, and feeding when the pH is more than 7.

In one implementation mode of the present disclosure, the fermentation culture medium is prepared from constituents of 45 to 50 g/L glycerol, 30 to 40 g/L peptone, 1 to 2 g/L ammonia chloride, 10 to 20 g/L maize slurry, 2.5 to 3 g/L K2HPO4, 2 to 2.5 g/L KH2PO4 1.5 to 2 g/L MgSO4.7H2O and 5 to 10 g/L NaCl, and the pH is adjusted to 7.

In one implementation mode of the present disclosure, the feeding culture medium is prepared from constituents of 40 to 60 percent of glycerol and 7 to 8 percent of yeast powder.

An eighth objective of the present disclosure is to provide application of the thermophilic L-asparaginase mutant in food and medical industries.

The present disclosure has the beneficial effects that:

A high-flux screening method suitable for thermophilic L-asparaginase is provided. The cell disruption and the enzyme activity measurement are synchronously performed at a high temperature, so that the problem that intracellular enzymes and thermophilic enzymes are difficult to screen is solved.

The composite mutant strain is obtained, and has the specific enzyme activity up to 3108 U/g which is 2.1 times the original enzyme.

The recombinant strain highly expressing the L-asparaginase is obtained through the promoter screening and the RBS optimization.

The present disclosure realizes high-yield fermentation of the L-asparaginase in a 5 L fermentation tank, and the enzyme activity yield is up to 6453 U/mL which is much higher than the reported highest enzyme activity yield.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION

For the purpose of understanding technical contents of the present disclosure more clearly, a detailed description is made by taking the following embodiments for example to only better understand the contents of the present disclosure instead of limiting the protection scope of the present disclosure.

A starting culture medium is prepared from: 35 g/L saccharose, 15 g/L peptone, 0.8 g/L urea, 12 g/L maize slurry, 2.612 g/L K2HPO4 and 2.041 g/L KH2PO4.

A fermentation culture medium is prepared from: 47 g/L glycerol, 35 g/L peptone, 1.5 g/L ammonia chloride, 15 g/L maize slurry, 2.612 g/L K2HPO4, 2.041 g/L K2HPO4, 1.845 g/L MgSO4.7H2O and 5 g/L NaCl, and the pH is adjusted to 7 with NaOH.

A feeding culture medium is prepared from: 50 percent of glycerol and 7.5 percent of yeast powder.

### EXAMPLE 1

**Construction, Transformation and Expression of Recombinant Plasmid pMA5-Asnase**

(1) For an L-asparaginase encoding gene sequence deduced from Pyrococcus yayanosii CH1, the homology between this sequence and escherichia coli-derived L-asparaginase is 24.34 percent. The homology between this sequence and bacillus subtilis-derived L-asparaginase is 20.41 percent. The homology between this sequence and Thermococcus kodakarensis-derived L-asparaginase is 65.15 percent. According to the L-asparaginase encoding gene sequence (SEQ ID NO.1) deduced from Pyrococcus yayanosii CH1, Sangon Biotech (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. is entrusted to optimize an L-asparaginase gene, then to clone the gene onto a vector pUCk to form a template (SEQ ID NO.2), and to design primers for PCR amplification. A gel extraction kit is adopted to purify and recycle PCR products, and the concentration of the recycled products is detected through electrophoresis. The recycled products are stored in a 1.5 ml centrifugal tube which is then put into a refrigerator for storage and later use.

(2) The recycled products obtained in Step (1) and a pMA5 plasmid are respectively subjected to double enzyme digestion with BamH I and Mlu I at 37° C. for 40 minutes. Products are recycled with the gel extraction kit. The recycled products are linked. A linkage system includes: 7 ul of enzyme-digested products of a target gene, 1 uL of enzyme-digested products of pMA5, 1 uL of T4 link ligase buffer and 1 uL of T4 link ligase, and enzyme linking is carried out at 16° C. for 12 hours. The linked products are transferred into a competence of bacillus subtilis 168, a kanamycin resistant plate of LB is coated for culturing for 12 hours. A positive gene is selected and cloned to a 10 mL LB shake flask for culturing to extract a plasmid for double enzyme digestion verification. After the verification is succeeded, the gene is sent to Sangon Biotech (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. for sequencing. After the sequence is correct, the plasmid pMA5-asnase is constructed, which is stored at −20° C. The recombinant strain corresponding to the pMA5-asnase is a recombinant strain B. subtilis 168/pMA5-asnase. A bacterium solution is added into glycerol till the concentration is 15 percent. The solution is put into a refrigerator at −40° C. for storage and later use.

(3) The recombinant strain B. subtilis 168/pMA5-asnase constructed in Step (2) is inoculated into the 10 mL LB shake flask for culturing for 12 hours, and then is transferred into a 100 mL starting culture medium for culturing for 24 hours. An enzyme activity of fermented supernate is measured by a Nessler developing method (Enzyme Microb Technol, 82, 15-22), thus obtaining an extracellular enzyme activity. B. subtilis 168/pMA5-asnase fermented bacteria are collected. Cells are disrupted by ultrasonic waves. Supernate obtained by centrifugating the disrupted cells is taken, and the enzyme activity of the supernate is measured by the Nessler developing method, thus obtaining an intracellular enzyme activity. The unit of the enzyme activity is defined as follows: under the measurement conditions, an enzyme amount required for producing 1 umol of ammonia gas within every minute is 1 enzyme activity unit. After the B. subtilis 168/pMA5-asnase is cultured for 24 hours, the total enzyme activity of the L-asparaginase expressed by the B. subtilis 168/pMA5-asnase is up to 89.03 +/−7.3 U/mL (the extracellular enzyme activity and the intracellular enzyme activity are respectively 23.31 and 65.72 U/mL). Intracellular enzyme protein is purified by a nickel column affinity chromatography method. After the intracellular enzyme protein is purified, it is measured that an optimum temperature for this enzyme is 95° C. The concentration of the protein is measured by a Bradford method, thus obtaining that the specific enzyme activity of Pyrococcus yayanosii CH1 is 1483 U/mL.

### EXAMPLE 2

**Screening, Construction and Expression of Mutant Strain with High Enzyme Activity**

(1) The pMA5-asnase is used as a template. Primers are designed for epPCR by using a GeneMorph II random mutagenesis kit. Products obtained by epPCR amplification are linked into sites BamHI and MluI of pMA5, and then are transformed into bacillus subtilis 168. A kanamycin resistant plate of LB is coated for culturing for 12 hours.

(2) In a baking oven (with no air) at 95° C., a 96-deep-well plate (with a cover) filled with 0.5 mL of reaction solution (25 mML-asparaginate, 50 Mm Tris-HCl, pH=8) is preheated for 10 minutes. A full loop of cultured mutation transformant single colonies which are cultured for 12 hours and obtained in Step (1) is selected with an inoculation loop, and is inoculated into the preheated 96-deep-well plate filled with the reaction solution. The single colony in the baking oven (with no air) at 95° C. is heated for 10 minutes. 10 uL of Nessler reagent is added for development. After placement at a room temperature for 3 minutes, 200 ul of the developed solution is put into the 96-well plate to measure an absorbancy with an ELIASA under the condition of OD450. The recombinant strain B. subtilis 168/pMA5-asnase containing the original Pyrococcus yayanosii CH1 L-asparaginase gene is used as a contrast. In the first round, three mutant strains (A1, B1 and C1) with relatively high L-asparaginase activity are selected from the colony, and then are cultured in LB for 12 hours. Plasmids are then extracted to obtain the most outstanding positive mutants A1(S17G/E72D/N177D), B1(A90S/I132L/R156S) and C1 (L222V/K272A). After the three mutated plasmids are mixed, a mixed plasmid is used as a template for epPCR amplification and screening in the second round. Three mutant strains (D2, E2 and F2) having the most outstanding effects are selected for sequencing again. In the second round of epPCR amplification and screening, three most outstanding positive mutants D2(S17G/W181F/K272A), E2((S17G/A90S/R156S/V282S) and F2(R156S/K272A) are obtained.

(3) Amino acid sequences of the six mutant strains obtained in Step (2) are analyzed, and it is found that S17G, A90S, R156S and K272A are the most common mutations. The pMA5-asnase is used as a template, and primers are designed for overlap extension PCR step by step to introduce genes at the mutated sites S17G, A90S, R156S and K272A to a position between enzyme digestion sites BamH I and Mlu I of pMA5-asnase to construct a recombinant plasmid pMA5-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A-2. The recombinant plasmid is transformed into the bacillus subtilis 168 to form a recombinant expression strain B. subtilis 168/pMA5-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A-2.

(4) The recombinant strain B. subtilis 168/pMA5-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A-2 is subjected to shake-flask fermentation expression, purification and specific enzyme activity measurement according to the method in Step (3) of Embodiment 1. The enzyme activity yield of the B. subtilis 168/pMA5-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A-2 is up to 178.16+/−15.6 U/mL (the extracellular enzyme activity and the intracellular enzyme activity are respectively 129.95 and 48.21 U/mL), which is twice that of the original strain. Furthermore, it is measured that the specific enzyme activity of the mutant S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A is 3108+/−152 U/mg, which is 2.1 times that of the original enzyme.

### EXAMPLE 3

**Construction of High-Yield L-Asparaginase Recombinant Strain**

(1) The pMA5-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A-2 is used as a template, and primers are designed for PCR amplification. PCR products are linked between enzyme digestion sites Ecor V and Hind III of pMA5 in the way in Step (2) of Embodiment 1 to construct a recombinant plasmid pMA5-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A. The recombinant plasmid is put into a refrigerator at −20° C. for storage and later use.

(2) A genome of bacillus subtilis 168 is extracted and used as a template. Primers are designed for PCR amplification, and obtained products are respectively linked between enzyme digestion sites EcoRI and EcoRV of the pMA5-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A in the way in Step (2) of Embodiment 1 to construct recombinant plasmids pMA5-P43-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A (the sequence of the promoter P43 is as shown in SEQ ID NO.10), pMA5-PgroEs-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A, pMA5-PsigX-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272, pMA5-PtrnQ-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A and pMA5-PyxiE-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A which have different promoters. The five plasmids are respectively transferred into the bacillus subtilis 168. The five recombinant strains are subjected to shake-flask fermentation expression according to the method in Step (3) of Embodiment 1. The expression quantity of the recombinant strain B. subtilis 168/pMA5-P43-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A containing the promoter P43 is 0.53 time greater than that of the contrast B. subtilis 168/pMA5-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A-2, and the enzyme activity of the recombinant strain is 270.8+/−31 U/mL (the extracellular enzyme activity and the intracellular enzyme activity are respectively 205.42 and 65.32 U/mL).

(3) An RBS sequence suitable for P43 and L-asparaginase transcription is designed by using an RBS calculator (https://www.denovodna.com/software/doLogin). The designed RBS sequence (SEQ ID NO. 11) replaces the original RBS sequence of P43 in a manner of long-primer PCR. The pMA5-P43-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A is used as a template, and primers are designed for PCR. Obtained products are respectively linked between enzyme digestion sites EcoRI and EcoRV of the pMA5-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A in the way in Step (2) of Embodiment 1 to construct a recombinant plasmid pMA5-P43-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A. The plasmid is transferred into the bacillus subtilis 168 to form a recombinant strain B. subtilis 168/pMA5-P43-RBS-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A. The obtained recombinant strain is subjected to shake-flask fermentation expression according to the method in Step (3) of Embodiment 1, thus obtaining the enzyme activity of 383.5+/−1 U/mL (the extracellular enzyme activity and the intracellular enzyme activity are respectively 285.65 and 97.85 U/mL).

### EXAMPLE 4

**Production of L-Asparaginate by Fermentation of L-Asparaginase in 5 L Fermentation Tank**

By taking the enzyme activity yield as a target and the recombinant strain B. subtilis 168/pMA5-P43-RBS-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A as an expression strain, in the 5 L fermentation tank, a feeding culture medium (50 percent of glycerol and 7.5 percent of yeast powder) and ammonia water at the concentration of 50 percent are respectively linked to acid and alkali inlets of the fermentation tank, and the pH is set to 7. Feeding is automatically carried out when the pH is more than 7, thereby realizing a pH and feeding coupling fermentation strategy. The cryopreservated B. subtilis 168/pMA5-P43-RBS-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A is inoculated into a 10 mL LB culture medium for shake-flask culturing for 12 hours, and then is transferred into a 100 mL of LB culture medium for shake-flask culturing for 12 hours. The B. subtilis 168/pMA5-P43-RBS-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A is inoculated into the 5 L fermentation tank filled with a 2 L fermentation culture medium according to an inoculation amount of 5 percent, so as to perform fermentation at a ventilating amount of 4 vvm at 600 rpm through the pH and feeding coupling strategy.

The recombinant strain B. subtilis 168/pMA5-P43-RBS-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A constructed in Step (3) of Embodiment 3 is used as an expression strain, and the enzyme activity yield of the L-asparaginase of the strain is used as a research object, so that constituents and concentrations of a carbon source, a nitrogen source, an inorganic nitrogen source and maize slurry in a starting culture medium are subjected to single factor and orthogonal experiments, thus obtaining a fermentation culture medium which is prepared from 47 g/L glycerol, 35 g/L peptone, 1.5 g/L ammonia chloride, 15 g/L maize slurry, 2.612 g/L K2HPO4, 2.041 g/L K2HPO4, 1.845 g/L MgSO4.7H2O and 5 g/L NaCl, and the pH is adjusted to 7 with NaOH.

The feeding culture medium is prepared from 50 percent of glycerol and 7.5 percent of yeast powder.

The recombinant strain B. subtilis 168/pMA5-P43-RBS-S17G/A90S/R156S/K272A constructed in Step (3) of Embodiment 3 is subjected to LB plate streak culturing for 12 hours, and a single colony is inoculated into the 10 mL LB for shake-flask culturing at 37° C. and 180 rpm for 12 hours. 500 uL of strain solution is inoculated into the 100 mL LB for shake-flask culturing at 37° C. and 180 rpm for 12 hours. The strain is inoculated into the 5 L fermentation tank filled with the 2 L of fermentation culture medium according to an inoculation amount of 5 percent. In the 5 L fermentation tank, the feeding culture medium and the ammonia water at the concentration of 50 percent are respectively linked to the acid and alkali inlets of the fermentation tank, and the pH is set to 7. Feeding is automatically carried when the pH is more than 7. The fermentation is performed by adopting the pH and feeding coupling fermentation strategy. Sampling is performed every 3 to 6 hours to monitor fermentation condition. After fermentation for 36 hours, the highest enzyme activity yield is 6453+/−127 U/mL.

### EXAMPLE 5

**Production of Enzyme Through Fermentation of L-Asparaginase Recombinant Strain Under Other Fermentation Strategies**

The L-asparaginase recombinant strain constructed in Embodiment 3 is fermented to produce the enzyme under an L-asparaginase fermentation strategy described in the document (Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering, 2015, 38(11): 2271-2284), and the highest enzyme activity of L-asparaginase is up to 317+/−53 U/mL.

The L-asparaginase recombinant strain constructed in Embodiment 3 is fermented to produce the enzyme under an L-asparaginase fermentation strategy described in the document (Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 2005, 68(2): 189-197), and the highest enzyme activity of L-asparaginase is up to 1352+/−87 U/mL.

