# DESCRIPTION

## FIELD OF THE INVENTION

The present invention relates to the development of genetically engineered fungal cells, preferably yeasts, that can produce specific chain length fatty acid derived products in a controllable and economic fashion. More specifically the invention relates to the production of very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) products and derivatives, such as very long chain fatty alcohols, e.g., docosanol, very long chain fatty acids, e.g., erucic acid, nervonic acid, and wax esters of such very long chain fatty alcohols and fatty acids, e.g., jojoba oil esters, that can be used in the production of a range of industrial chemicals and oils, as well as pharmaceutical and cosmetic products.

## BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

Primary alcohols are a product class of compounds having a variety of industrial applications, this include a variety of biofuels and specialty chemicals. Primary alcohols also can be used to make a large number of additional industrial products including polymers and surfactants. Higher primary alcohols, also known as fatty alcohols, and their derivatives have numerous commercial applications, including use as surfactants, lubricants, plasticizers, solvents, emulsifiers, emollients, thickeners, flavors, fragrances, and fuels. Fatty alcohols can further be dehydrated to alpha-olefins, which have utility in the manufacture of polymers, lubricants, surfactants, plasticizers, and can also be used in fuel formulations.

Current technologies for producing fatty alcohols involve inorganic catalyst-mediated reduction of fatty acids to the corresponding primary alcohols. The fatty acids used in this process are derived from natural sources, e.g., plant and animal oils and fats, primarily coconut, palm, palm kernel, tallow and lard. These various sources have different fatty acid compositions; of particular importance are the varying acyl chain lengths that are present. As a consequence, the fatty alcohols derived from these fatty acids also have varying chain lengths. The chain length of fatty alcohols greatly impacts the chemical and physical properties of the molecules, and thus different chain lengths are used for different applications. Fatty alcohols are currently produced from, for example, hydrogenation of fatty acids, hydroformylation of terminal olefins, partial oxidation of n-paraffins and the Al-catalyzed polymerization of ethylene. Fatty alcohols can also be made by chemical hydration of alpha-olefins produced from petrochemical feedstocks. Unfortunately, it is not commercially viable to produce fatty alcohols directly from the oxidation of petroleum-based linear hydrocarbons (n-paraffins). This impracticality is because the oxidation of n-paraffins produces primarily secondary alcohols, tertiary alcohols or ketones, or a mixture of these compounds, but does not produce high yields of fatty alcohols. Additionally, currently known methods for producing fatty alcohols suffer from the disadvantage that they are restricted to feedstock which is relatively expensive, notably ethylene, which is produced via the thermal cracking of petroleum. In addition, current methods require several steps, and several catalyst types.

Plant primary fatty alcohols occur either in free form or are linked by an ester-bond with a fatty acid, e.g. palmitic acid, to give a wax ester or an aromatic compound, e.g. ferulic acid, to give an alkyl hydroxycinnamate. These various compounds are often components of plant extracellular lipid barriers: cuticle coating the aerial surfaces, suberin found in the cell walls of various internal and external tissue layers, and sporopollenin found in the outer walls of pollen grains. These waxes are usually complex mixtures of very-long-chain (C20-C34) fatty acids and derivatives including primary fatty alcohols and wax esters. Wax esters can also serve as energy storage, such as in the case of jojoba (Simmondsia chinensis) seed oil.

Unlike most other plants, the oil of jojoba seeds, which constitutes between 45-55%, by weight, of the seeds, is mainly composed of very long chain monoesters of fatty acids and alcohols (97-98%, by weight) rather than triglycerides. These esters, which are commonly referred to as wax esters, are straight chain esters predominantly 36-46 carbons in length, with an ester bond approximately in the center of the chain. The oil, which exists as a liquid at room temperature, is used extensively as a raw material in the cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries for its dermatological properties. Jojoba oil is also used as an alternative to sperm oil as a lubricant and as a plasticizer. Because it is not subject to lipase hydrolysis and is thus poorly digested, jojoba oil has also been investigated as a non-caloric fat replacement in foods.

However, the relatively short supply of jojoba oil and its extremely desirable properties have resulted in a rather high price, preventing its use for commercial preparation of a large number of useful derivatives and products.

Thus, there exists a need for alternative means for cost effectively producing commercial and scalable quantities of very long chain length fatty acid derived products, including jojoba oil.

Previously, synthesis of long chain fatty alcohols and very long chain wax ester have only been demonstrated in yeast and Escherichia coli when heterologous expression of particular enzymes, including fatty acid reductase (FAR) and wax ester synthases, is combined with feeding of fatty acid substrates or relevant precursors (Kalscheuer et al., 2006; Li et al., 2008; Teerawanichpan and Qiu, 2010). However, these solutions are not suitable for producing scalable quantities of very long chain fatty acid derived products in a cost-effective manner.

## SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

The present invention provides genetically engineered fungal cells, preferably yeasts, that include genes for the biosynthesis of very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) products or derivatives, such as very long chain fatty acids, e.g., erucic acid, nervonic acid, very long chain fatty alcohols, e.g., docosanol, and/or wax esters, e.g. jojoba oil esters, and methods of producing such very long chain fatty acid products that can be used to produce a range of industrial chemicals and oils, e.g. lubricants, as well as pharmaceutical and cosmetic products, e.g. emulsifiers, emollients, in a controllable and economic fashion.

An aspect of the embodiments relates to genetically modified fungal cell capable of producing a VLCFA and/or a VLCFA derivative. The genetically modified fungal cell comprises at least one exogenous gene encoding a fatty acyl-CoA reductase and at least one gene encoding an elongase, and/or at least one gene encoding a fatty acid synthase. The at least one gene encoding the elongase is an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding the elongase and/or an exogenous gene encoding the elongase. Correspondingly, the at least one gene encoding the fatty acid synthase is an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding the fatty acid synthase and/or an exogenous gene encoding the fatty acid synthase.

Another aspect of the embodiments relates to a genetically modified fungal cell capable of producing a VLCFA or VLCFA derivative. The genetically fungal cell comprises at least one gene encoding a Mycobacterium fatty acid synthase.

A further aspect of the embodiments relates to a method for the production of a VLCFA and/or a VLCFA derivative. The method comprises culturing a genetically modified fungal cell according to the embodiments in a culture medium. The method also comprises isolating the VLCFA and/or said VLCFA derivative from the genetically modified fungal cell and/or from the culture medium.

The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (S. cerevisiae) is a very important cell factory as it is already widely used for production of biofuels, chemicals and pharmaceuticals, and there is therefore much interest in developing platform strains of this yeast that can be used for production of a whole range of different products. It is however a problem that such a platform cell factory for efficient production of fatty acid derived products is not as efficient as needed for good industrial application. This invention is, in an embodiment, a multiple gene modification approach of the yeast generating a stable and scalable platform for production of very long chain fatty acid derived products by combining pathways for direct conversion from fatty acyl-CoA to long or very long chain fatty alcohols and/or wax esters.

In one embodiment, the VLCFA derivative, e.g., fatty alcohols, fatty acid, wax esters etc., produced by the recombinant fungal cell, such as yeast is a very long chain fatty alcohol, preferably docosanol which can be used for production of industrial chemicals or pharmaceutical and cosmetic products. In another embodiment, the VLCFA derivative is a very long chain fatty acid, preferably erucic acid ((Z)-docos-13-enoic acid) which is used as a component in industrial chemicals or pharmaceutical and cosmetic products. In yet another embodiment, the VLCFA derivative of this invention is nervonic acid ((Z)-Tetracos-15-enoic acid) which could be used in pharmaceutical and food products. For instance, nervonic acid can be used for the treatment of demyelinating diseases, including Multiple Sclerosis. In addition, nervonic acid can also be used for its nutritional value as a dietary supplement, for instance, in baby foods and/or infant formulas. In another embodiment, the VLCFA derivatives of this invention are wax esters, preferably jojoba oils/esters which can be used for production of industrial chemicals or pharmaceutical and cosmetic products. These and other aspects of the invention are set forth in more detail in the description of the invention below.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION

The present invention now will be described hereinafter with reference to the accompanying drawings and examples, in which embodiments of the invention are shown. This description is not intended to be a detailed catalog of all the different ways in which the invention may be implemented, or all the features that may be added to the instant invention. For example, features illustrated with respect to one embodiment may be incorporated into other embodiments, and features illustrated with respect to a particular embodiment may be deleted from that embodiment. Thus, the invention contemplates that in some embodiments of the invention, any feature or combination of features set forth herein can be excluded or omitted. In addition, numerous variations and additions to the various embodiments suggested herein will be apparent to those skilled in the art in light of the instant disclosure, which do not depart from the instant invention. Hence, the following descriptions are intended to illustrate some particular embodiments of the invention, and not to exhaustively specify all permutations, combinations and variations thereof.

### Definitions

Unless otherwise defined, all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as commonly understood by one of ordinary skill in the art to which this invention belongs. As such, the elongases, reductases, desaturases, fatty acid synthases and wax ester synthases, polypetides and genes encoding them, that may be used in this invention are any of those known in the art or homologues or derivatives thereof.

The terminology used in the description of the invention herein is for the purpose of describing particular embodiments only and is not intended to be limiting of the invention.

All publications, patent applications, patents and other references cited herein are incorporated by reference in their entireties for the teachings relevant to the sentence and/or paragraph in which the reference is presented.

Unless the context indicates otherwise, it is specifically intended that the various features of the invention described herein can be used in any combination. Moreover, the present invention also contemplates that in some embodiments of the invention, any feature or combination of features set forth herein can be excluded or omitted. To illustrate, if the specification states that a composition comprises components A, B and C, it is specifically intended that any of A, B or C, or a combination thereof, can be omitted and disclaimed singularly or in any combination.

To facilitate understanding of the invention, a number of terms are defined below.

As used in the description of the invention and the appended claims, the singular forms “a,” “an” and “the” are intended to include the plural forms as well, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

Also as used herein, “and/or” refers to and encompasses any and all possible combinations of one or more of the associated listed items, as well as the lack of combinations when interpreted in the alternative (“or”).

The term “comprise,” “comprises” and “comprising” as used herein, specify the presence of the stated features, integers, steps, operations, elements, and/or components, but do not preclude the presence or addition of one or more other features, integers, steps, operations, elements, components, and/or groups thereof.

As used herein, the transitional phrase “consisting essentially of” means that the scope of a claim is to be interpreted to encompass the specified materials or steps recited in the claim and those that do not materially affect the basic and novel characteristic(s) of the claimed invention. Thus, the term “consisting essentially of” when used in a claim of this invention is not intended to be interpreted to be equivalent to “comprising.”

As used herein the term “recombinant” when used means that a particular nucleic acid (DNA or RNA) is the product of various combinations of cloning, restriction, and/or ligation steps resulting in a construct having a structural coding or non-coding sequence distinguishable from endogenous nucleic acids found in natural systems.

As used herein, the terms “protein” and “polypeptide” refer to compounds comprising amino acids joined via peptide bonds and are used interchangeably.

As used herein, the terms “increase,” “increases,” “increased,” “increasing,” “enhance,” “enhanced,” “enhancing,” and “enhancement” (and grammatical variations thereof) indicate an elevation of at least about 1%, 2%, 3%, 4%, 5%, 6%, 7%, 8%, 9%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, 40%, 45%, 50%, 55%, 60%, 65%, 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 100%, 150%, 200%, 300%, 400%, 500% or more, or any range therein, as compared to a control.

As used herein, the terms “reduce,” “reduces,” “reduced,” “reduction,” “diminish,” “suppress,” and “decrease” and similar terms mean a decrease of at least about 0%, 1%, 2%, 3%, 4%, 5%, 6%, 7%, 8%, 9%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, 40%, 45%, 50%, 55%, 60%, 65%, 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, 100%, 150%, 200%, 300%, 400%, 500% or more, or any range therein, as compared to a control.

A reduced expression of a gene as used herein involves a gentical modification that reduces the transcription of the gene, reduces the translation of the mRNA transcribed from the gene and/or reduces post-translational processing of the protein translated from the mRNA. Such genetical modification includes insertion(s), deletion(s), replacement(s) or mutation(s) applied to the control sequence, such as a promoter and enhancer, of the gene. For instance, the promoter of the gene could be replaced by a less active or inducible promoter to thereby result in a reduced transcription of the gene. Also a knock-out of the promoter would result in reduced, typically zero, expression of the gene.

As used herein the terms “knock-out” or “deletion” or “disruption” refers to a gene that is inoperative or knocked out and/or a nonfunctional gene product, e.g. a polypeptide having essentially no activity, e.g. less than about 10% or even 5% as compared to the activity of the wild type polypeptide.

As used herein, the term “portion” or “fragment” of a nucleotide sequence of the invention will be understood to mean a nucleotide sequence of reduced length relative to a reference nucleic acid or nucleotide sequence and comprising, consisting essentially of and/or consisting of a nucleotide sequence of contiguous nucleotides identical or almost identical, e.g. 80%, 81%, 82%, 83%, 84%, 85%, 86%, 87%, 88%, 89%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 98%, 99% identical, to the reference nucleic acid or nucleotide sequence. Such a nucleic acid fragment or portion according to the invention may be, where appropriate, included in a larger polynucleotide of which it is a constituent.

Different nucleic acids or proteins having homology are referred to herein as “homologues.” The term homologue includes homologous sequences from the same and other species and orthologous sequences from the same and other species. “Homology” refers to the level of similarity between two or more nucleic acid and/or amino acid sequences in terms of percent of positional identity, i.e. sequence similarity or identity. Homology also refers to the concept of similar functional properties among different nucleic acids or proteins. Thus, the compositions and methods of the invention further comprise homologues to the nucleotide sequences and polypeptide sequences of this invention. “Orthologous,” as used herein, refers to homologous nucleotide sequences and/or amino acid sequences in different species that arose from a common ancestral gene during speciation. A homologue of a nucleotide sequence of this invention has a substantial sequence identity, e.g. at least about 70%, 75%, 80%, 81%, 82%, 83%, 84%, 85%, 86%, 87%, 88%, 89%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, 99%, and/or 100%, to said nucleotide sequence.

The term “overexpress,” “overexpresses” or “overexpression” as used herein refers to higher levels of activity of a gene, e.g. transcription of the gene; higher levels of translation of mRNA into protein; and/or higher levels of production of a gene product, e.g. polypeptide, than would be in the cell in its native or control, e.g. not transformed with the particular heterologous or recombinant polypeptides being overexpressed, state. A typical example of an overexpressed gene is a gene under transcription control of another promoter as compared to the native promoter of the gene. Also, or alternatively, other changes in the control elements of a gene, such as enhancers, could be used to overexpress the particular gene. Furthermore, modifications that affect, i.e. increase, the translation of the mRNA transcribed from the gene could, alternatively or in addition, be used to achieve an overexpressed gene as used herein. These terms can also refer to an increase in the number of copies of a gene and/or an increase in the amount of mRNA and/or gene product in the cell. Overexpression can result in levels that are 25%, 50%, 100%, 200%, 500%, 1000%, 2000% or higher in the cell, as compared to control levels.

An “exogenous”, “heterologous” or a “recombinant” nucleotide sequence is a nucleotide sequence not naturally associated with a host cell into which it is introduced, including non-naturally occurring multiple copies of a naturally occurring nucleotide sequence. Such an exogenous gene could be a gene from another species or strain, a modified, mutated or evolved version of a gene naturally occurring in the host cell or a chimeric version of a gene naturally occurring in the host cell or fusion genes. In these former cases, the modification, mutation or evolution causes a change in the nucleotide sequence of the gene to thereby obtain a modified, mutated or evolved gene with another nucleotide sequence as compared to the gene naturally occurring in the host cell. Evolved gene refers to genes encoding evolved genes and obtained by geneticial modification, such as mutation or exposure to an evolutionary pressure, to derive a new gene with a different nucleotide sequence as compared to the wild type or native gene. A chimeric gene is formed through the combination of portions of one or more coding sequences to produce a new gene. These modifications are distinct from a fusion gene, which merges whole gene sequences into a single reading frame and often retain their original functions.

An “endogenous”, “native” or “wild type” nucleic acid, nucleotide sequence, polypeptide or amino acid sequence refers to a naturally occurring or endogenous nucleic acid, nucleotide sequence, polypeptide or amino acid sequence. Thus, for example, a “wild type mRNA” is an mRNA that is naturally occurring in or endogenous to the organism. A “homologous” nucleic acid sequence is a nucleotide sequence naturally associated with a host cell into which it is introduced.

Also as used herein, the terms “nucleic acid,” “nucleic acid molecule,” “nucleotide sequence” and “polynucleotide” refer to RNA or DNA that is linear or branched, single or double stranded, or a hybrid thereof. The term also encompasses RNA/DNA hybrids.

As used herein, the term “nucleotide sequence” refers to a heteropolymer of nucleotides or the sequence of these nucleotides from the 5′ to 3′ end of a nucleic acid molecule and includes DNA or RNA molecules, including cDNA, a DNA fragment or portion, genomic DNA, synthetic, e.g. chemically synthesized, DNA, plasmid DNA, mRNA, and anti-sense RNA, any of which can be single stranded or double stranded. The terms “nucleotide sequence” “nucleic acid,” “nucleic acid molecule,” “oligonucleotide” and “polynucleotide” are also used interchangeably herein to refer to a heteropolymer of nucleotides. Nucleic acid molecules and/or nucleotide sequences provided herein are presented herein in the 5′ to 3′ direction, from left to right and are represented using the standard code for representing the nucleotide characters as set forth in the U.S. sequence rules, 37 CFR § § 1.821-1.825 and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Standard ST.25.

As used herein, the term “gene” refers to a nucleic acid molecule capable of being used to produce mRNA, antisense RNA, miRNA, anti-microRNA antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotide (AMO) and the like. Genes may or may not be capable of being used to produce a functional protein or gene product. Genes can include both coding and non-coding regions, e.g. introns, regulatory elements, promoters, enhancers, termination sequences and/or 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions. A gene may be “isolated” by which is meant a nucleic acid that is substantially or essentially free from components normally found in association with the nucleic acid in its natural state. Such components include other cellular material, culture medium from recombinant production, and/or various chemicals used in chemically synthesizing the nucleic acid.

A codon optimized version of a gene refers to an exogenous gene introduced into a fungal cell and where the codons of the gene have been optimized with regard to the particular fungal cell. Generally, not all tRNAs are expressed equally or at the same level across species. Codon optimization of a gene sequence thereby involves changing codons to match the most prevalent tRNAs, i.e. to change a codon recoqnized by a low prevalent tRNA with a synonymous codon recognized by a tRNA that is comparatively more prevalent in the given fungal cell. This way the mRNA from the codon optimized gene will be more efficiently translated. The codon and the synonymous codon preferably encode the same amino acid.

“Introducing” in the context of a yeast cell means contacting a nucleic acid molecule with the cell in such a manner that the nucleic acid molecule gains access to the interior of the cell. Accordingly, polynucleotides and/or nucleic acid molecules can be introduced yeast cells in a single transformation event, in separate transformation events. Thus, the term “transformation” as used herein refers to the introduction of a heterologous nucleic acid into a cell. Transformation of a yeast cell can be stable or transient.

“Transient transformation” in the context of a polynucleotide means that a polynucleotide is introduced into the cell and does not integrate into the genome of the cell.

By “stably introducing” or “stably introduced” in the context of a polynucleotide introduced into a cell, it is intended that the introduced polynucleotide is stably incorporated into the genome of the cell, and thus the cell is stably transformed with the polynucleotide.

“Stable transformation” or “stably transformed” as used herein means that a nucleic acid molecule is introduced into a cell and integrates into the genome of the cell. As such, the integrated nucleic acid molecule is capable of being inherited by the progeny thereof, more particularly, by the progeny of multiple successive generations. “Genome” as used herein includes the nuclear genome. Stable transformation as used herein can also refer to a nucleic acid molecule that is maintained extrachromasomally, for example, as a plasmid.

Transient transformation may be detected by, for example, an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or Western blot, which can detect the presence of a peptide or polypeptide encoded by one or more nucleic acid molecules introduced into an organism. Stable transformation of a cell can be detected by, for example, a Southern blot hybridization assay of genomic DNA of the cell with nucleic acid sequences which specifically hybridize with a nucleotide sequence of a nucleic acid molecule introduced into an organism, e.g. a yeast. Stable transformation of a cell can be detected by, for example, a Northern blot hybridization assay of RNA of the cell with nucleic acid sequences which specifically hybridize with a nucleotide sequence of a nucleic acid molecule introduced into a yeast or other organism. Stable transformation of a cell can also be detected by, e.g. a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or other amplification reaction as are well known in the art, employing specific primer sequences that hybridize with target sequence(s) of a nucleic acid molecule, resulting in amplification of the target sequence(s), which can be detected according to standard methods Transformation can also be detected by direct sequencing and/or hybridization protocols well known in the art.

“Gentical modification” or “genetically modified” as used herein involves such genetic modifications to the genome of the fungal cell, such as yeast, and/or introduction of exogenous nucleotide sequences, such as in the form of one or more plasmids, into the fungal cell, such as yeast.

The term “fatty alcohol” as used herein, is intended to mean an aliphatic compound that comprises one or more hydroxyl groups. The fatty alcohol possesses the group —CH2OH that can be oxidized so as to form a corresponding aldehyde or acid having the same number of carbon atoms. A fatty alcohol can be a saturated fatty alcohol or an unsaturated fatty alcohol.

The term “fatty aldehyde” as used herein, is intended to mean an aliphatic compound that comprises an aldehyde (CHO) group. The fatty aldehyde can be reduced to form the corresponding alcohol or oxidized to form the carboxylic acid having the same number of carbon atoms. A fatty aldehyde can be a saturated fatty aldehyde or an unsatured fatty aldehyde.

The term “fatty acid” as used herein, is intended to mean an aliphatic compound that comprises at least one carboxylic acid group (COOH). The fatty acid can be reduced to form the corresponding alcohol or aldehyde having the same number of carbon atoms. A fatty acid can be a saturated fatty acid or an unsaturated fatty acid.

The term “fatty acid products” or “fatty acid derivatives” as used interchangeably herein, include a fatty acid or a fatty acid derivative; such as a fatty aldehyde, a fatty alcohol, an omega hydroxy fatty acid, a fatty ester, including a wax ester, a triglyceride, fatty-acyl-CoA, fatty acyl-ACP, or any other fatty acid derivatives. In a particular embodiment, a fatty acid product or derivative is selected among a group consisting of a fatty acid, a fatty alcohol and a wax ester.

The term “long chain” fatty acid (LCFA) or long chain fatty acid derivative, as used herein is a fatty acid or fatty acid derivative having an acyl chain length of 16 to 18 carbons.

The term “very long chain” fatty acid (VLCFA) or very long chain fatty acid derivative, as used herein is a fatty acid or fatty acid derivative having an acyl chain length of greater than 18 carbons. In a particular embodiment, the VLCFA product or derivative is a C19-C28 product or derivative, i.e. preferably has an acyl or alkyl length of 19 to 26 carbons or 19 to 24 carbons.

A VLCFA product or derivative is preferably selected from a group consisting of a very long chain fatty acid, a very long chain fatty alcohol or a wax ester that is an ester of i) a very long chain fatty acid and a fatty alcohol, ii) a fatty acid and a very long chain fatty alcohol, iii) a very long chain fatty acid and a very long chain fatty alcohol or iv) a fatty acid (B-side) and a fatty alcohol (A-side) and where the total length of the carbon chain, i.e. A-side+B-side, is greater than 18 carbons. In a particular embodiment, the A-side of the wax ester has a carbon chain length of C16-C28 and the B-side of the wax ester has a carbon chain length of C16-C28. In such a particular embodiment, the wax ester is an ester of i) a long chain or a very long chain fatty acid and ii) a long chain or a very long chain fatty alcohol.

The term “elongase” and that can be referred to by the abbreviation (ELO) as used herein, are enzymes that utilize malonyl-CoA to add a C2 unit to a growing acyl-CoA chain. This process also involves decarboxylation and is thus largely irreversible. Elongases are found in several compartments including the mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, and peroxisomes.

The endoplasmic reticulum also has an elongase system for synthesizing very long chain fatty acids (C18+) from acyl-CoA substrates of varying lengths. Genes involved in the elongase system include YBR159W, PHS1, TSC13, CER10, KCR1, PAS2, ELO1, ELO2 and ELO3.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell is a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell and the at least one gene encoding the elongase comprises an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding an enzyme from an elongase system selected from the group consisting of a β-ketoacyl-CoA synthase (KCS) (Elo1 and/or Elo2), a β-ketoacyl-CoA reductase (YBR159W), a β-hydroxy acyl-CoA dehydratase (Phs1) and an enoyl-CoA reductase (Tsc13). This embodiment can be combined with the above described embodiment involving an exogenous gene encoding an elongase. In such a case, the S. cerevisiae cell comprises at least one exogenous gene encoding an elongase and at least one endogenous gene encoding an enzyme from the elongase system.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell further comprises an exogenous gene encoding an enzyumme from an elongase system selected from the group consisting of Arabidopsis thaliana reductase (CER10, KCR1) and dehydratase, and codon optimized versions thereof.

The term “fatty acyl-CoA reductase”, or “fatty acyl reductase”, “very long chain fatty acid reductase” or “fatty alcohol forming acyl-CoA reductase” and that can be referred to by the abbreviation “FAR” as used herein, produces alcohols as a product of a reduction reaction. FAR catalyzes the reduction of a fatty acyl-CoA, a fatty acyl-ACP, or other fatty acyl thioester complex to a fatty alcohol, in a reaction linked to the oxidation of NAD(P)H to NAD(P)+. FARs catalyze this reaction through two steps, first creating an aldehyde and secondly the corresponding alcohol. Therefore these enzymes also take the aldehydes as substrates. FARs have been cloned from several plants, including Simmondsia chinensis (jojoba), Arabidopsis thaliana, rice and wheat, as well as insects, mammals, birds, a phytoflagellate protist, a planktonic crustacean, and from prokaryotes like Marinobactor aquaeolei.

The term “desaturase” as used herein, means an enzyme that can desaturate fatty acids to produce a mono- or poly-unsaturated fatty acid or precursor thereof of interest. Fatty acid desaturases catalyze the introduction of a double bond into an acyl chain with strict regioselectivity and stereoselectivity. Membrane bound fatty acid desaturases are expressed in eukaryotes and bacteria. It is a diverse family constituting at least 10 different types of regioselectivities and chain length specificities, such as Δ4-Δ6, Δ8-Δ13 and Δ15, including Δ9. Desaturase genes include OLE1 derived from S. cerevisiae, ChDes9-1 and ChDes9-2 from Calanus hyperboreus and a desaturase derived from Simmondsia chinensis

The term “wax synthases” or “wax ester synthases” as used herein, are used interchangeably and means enzymes capable of catalyzing the combination of acyl-thioesters and fatty alcohols to fatty acid alkyl esters (FAAEs). Wild-type yeast does not have the metabolic machinery for producing very long chain fatty acid alkyl esters (FAAEs). Wax synthases catalyzing the former reactions, are characteristics of organisms such as Acinetobacter baylyi, Arabidopsis thaliana, Euglena gracilis, Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus, Simmondsia chinensis, Marinobacter aquaeolei.

The term “FAS” or “fatty acid synthases” as used herein, is an enzymatic system that catalyzes the initiation and elongation of acyl chains and thus plays a key role in fatty acid synthesis from acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA. In the yeast S. cerevisiae, fatty acids are synthesized by a 2.4 Mba multifunctional enzyme complex with two subunits encoded by two unlinked genes FAS1 and FAS 2. Alternative FAS systems for producing very long chain (up to C26) fatty acids include for example FASs from Mycobacteria.

In a general aspect, the present invention is directed towards a genetically modified fungal cell that is capable of producing a VLCFA and/or a VLCFA. In a particular embodiment, the fungal cell is a yeast cell or mold cell.

In some embodiments, S. cerevisiae can be a host for carrying out the invention, as it is a popular host in basic and applied research apart from being a good ethanol producer, a precursor of esters and specifically of fatty acid ethyl esters. In addition, other yeast cells useful with the present invention include, but are not limited to, other Saccharomyces species, Hansenula polymorpha, Kluyveromyces species, Pichia species, Candida species, Trichoderma species, Yarrowia lipolytica, Rhodotorula graminis, Trichosporon oleaginosus, Rhodosporidium toruloides, Lipomyces starkeyi, etc.

In industry, there is much interest in applying a limited number of platform cell factories for production of a wide range of fuels and chemicals as this allows for flexible use of production facilities, which are very capital intensive. One of these platform cell factories is the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is widely used for the production of beer, bread, wine, bioethanol, nutraceuticals, chemicals and pharmaceuticals. These platform cell factories can efficiently convert raw materials, today typically glucose/fructose derived from starch or sucrose, but in the future also pentoses derived from lignocellulose, into so-called precursor metabolites can then be further converted into products of interest.

In the invention herein we have generated a yeast platform cell factory that can convert fatty acyl-CoA to very long chain fatty acid derivatives. The yeast S. cerevisiae does not naturally accumulate very long chain fatty acids and while it is difficult to introduce efficient pathways from fatty acyl-CoA to very long chain fatty acid derivatives, the inventors of the present invention have identified a possible route for this introduction. Strategies for reconstructing such a synthetic pathway from fatty acyl-CoA to very long chain fatty acid derivatives, leading to a cell factory for producing very long chain fatty acid derivatives, such as fatty acids, e.g. erucic acid, nervonic acid, fatty alcohols, e.g. docosanol, and wax esters, e.g. jojoba oil, or more correctly jojoba esters or jojoba wax esters, are described below.

The genetically modified fungal cell, preferably yeast, of this invention comprises one or more genetic modifications to improve production of the desired very long chain fatty acid derivatives. Such modifications can include, but are not limited to the introduction of new enzymes, and/or biosynthetic and/or metabolic pathways and/or heterologous expression of one or more genes (see FIG. 1). In addition, such modifications to improve production of very long chain fatty acid derivatives also comprise elimination or reduction of non-essential pathways, or pathways that compete with the production of very long chain fatty acid derivatives.

Accordingly, an aspect of the embodiments relates to a genetically modified fungal cell capable of producing a very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) and/or a VLCFA derivative. In this aspect, the genetically modified fungal cell comprises at least one exogenous gene encoding a fatty acyl-CoA reductase. The genetically modified fungal cell also comprises, in this aspect i) at least one gene encoding an elongase, and/or at least one gene encoding a fatty acid synthase.

The at least one gene encoding the elongase is an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding the elongase and/or an exogenous gene encoding the elongase. Correspondingly, the at least one gene encoding the fatty acid synthase is an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding the fatty acid synthase and/or an exogenous gene encoding the fatty acid synthase.

In an embodiment, the at least one exogenous gene encoding the fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR) is selected from a group consisting of a FAR from Apis mellifera (AmFAR), a FAR from Marinobacter aquaeoliei VT8 (MaFAldhR), a FAR from Simmondsia chinensis (SciFAR), a FAR from Triticum aestivum (TaFAR), a FAR from Arabidopsis thaliana (At5FAR), a FAR from Marinobacter algicola DG893, a FAR from Marinobacter adhaerens HP15, a FAR from Taxus baccata, a FAR from Euglena gracilis, a FAR from Oryza sativa, a FAR from Gallus gallus, a FAR from Yponomeuta evonymellus, a FAR from Mus musculus, and codon optimized versions thereof.

In an embodiment, the at least one gene encoding the elongase comprises an exogenous gene encoding the elongase selected from a group consisting of an elongase from Arabidopsis thaliana (Fae1), a β-ketoacyl-CoA synthase (KCS) from Brassica napus (BnKCS), a KCS from Crambe abyssinica (CaKCS), a KCS from Cardamine graeca (CgKCS), a KCS from Lunaria annua (LaKCS), a KCS from Simmondsia chinensis (SciKCS), a KCS from Tropaeolum majus (TmKCS), and codon optimized versions thereof.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell is a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell and the at least one gene encoding the elongase comprises an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding an enzyme from an elongase system selected from the group consisting of a β-ketoacyl-CoA synthase (KCS) (Elo1 and/or Elo2), a β-ketoacyl-CoA reductase (YBR159W), a β-hydroxy acyl-CoA dehydratase (Phs1) and an enoyl-CoA reductase (Tsc13). This embodiment can be combined with the above described embodiment involving an exogenous gene encoding an elongase. In such a case, the S. cerevisiae cell comprises at least one exogenous gene encoding an elongase and at least one endogenous gene encoding an enzyme from the elongase system.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell further comprises an exogenous gene encoding an enzyumme from an elongase system selected from the group consisting of Arabidopsis thaliana reductase (CER10, KCR1) and dehydratase, and codon optimized versions thereof.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell is a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell genetically modified for reduced expression of and/or knock-out of the gene encoding Elo3.

In an embodiment, the at least one gene encoding the fatty acid synthase comprises an exogenous gene encoding the fatty acid synthase (FAS) selected from a group consisting of a FAS from Mycobacterium vaccae, a FAS from Mycobacterium diernhoferi 41002, a FAS from Mycobacterium neoaurum, a FAS from Mycobacterium parafortuitum PA-1, a FAS from Mycobacterium intracellulare, a FAS from Rhodosporidium toruloides, and codon optimized versions thereof. In an embodiment, the exogenous gene is an envolved version of the gene encoding fatty acid synthase 1 (Fas1) and/or an envolved version of the gene encoding fatty acid synthase 2 (Fas 2).

In an embodiment, the fungal cell is a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell and the at least one gene encoding the fatty acid synthase comprises an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding fatty acid synthase 1 (Fas1) and/or fatty acid synthase 2 (Fas2) or evolved versions thereof. This embodiment can be combined with the above described embodiment involving an exogenous gene encoding a fatty acid synthase. In such a case, the S. cerevisiae cell comprises at least one exogenous gene encoding a fatty acid synthase and at least one endogenous gene encoding a fatty acid synthase.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell comprises the at least one gene encoding the fatty acid synthase and a gene encoding an acyl-carrier protein synthase, such as a Mycobacterium vaccae acyl-carrier protein synthase.

In a particular embodiment, the fungal cell comprises an exogenous gene encoding a fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR) from Arabidopsis thaliana (At5FAR) and an overexpressed Elo2 gene encoding a β-ketoacyl-CoA synthase (KCS). The fungal cell is furthermore preferably a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell genetically modified for reduced expression of and/or knock-out of the gene encoding Elo3.

In another particular embodiment, the S. cerevisiae cell further comprises an exogenous gene or an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding an acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) and an overexpressed Elo1 gene encoding a KCS. The S. cerevisiae cell is preferably genetically modified for knock-out of the gal1 gene encoding a galactokinase.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell further comprises at least one exogenous gene encoding a wax synthase.

In an embodiment, the at least one gene encoding said wax synthase (WS) is selected from a group consisting of a WS from Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 (AbWS), a WS from Arabidopsis thaliana (AtWS), a WS from Euglena gracilis (EgWS), a WS from Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus DSM 8798 (MhWS), a WS from Simmondsia chinensis (SciWS), a WS from Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, and codon optimized versions thereof.

In a particular embodiment, the fungal cell comprises an exogenous gene encoding a fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR) from Marinobacter aquaeoliei VT8 (MaFAldhR), or a codon optimized version thereof, an exogenous gene encoding a wax synthase (WS) selected from the group consisting of a WS from Arabidopsis thaliana (AtWS), a WS from Euglena gracilis (EgWS), a WS from Simmondsia chinensis (SciWS), or a codon optimized version thereof; and an overexpressed Elo2 gene encoding a β-ketoacyl-CoA synthase (KCS).

The fungal cell is preferably a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell. The S. cerevisiae cell preferably further comprises an exogenous gene or an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding an acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), and is genetically modified for reduced expression of and/or knock-out of the gene encoding Elo3.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell further comprises at least one gene encoding a desaturase. The at least one gene encoding the desaturase is an endogenous gene overexpressing the desaturase and/or an exogenous gene encoding the desaturase.

In an embodiment, the at least one gene encoding the desaturase comprises an exogenous gene encoding the desaturase selected from a group consisting of a desaturase from Simmondsia chinensis (SciFAD), a desaturase from Calanus hyperboreus (ChDes9-1 and/or ChDes9-2), and codon optimized versions thereof.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell is a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell and the at least one gene encoding the desaturase comprises an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding Δ9-desaturase (Ole1). This embodiment can be combined with the above described embodiment involving an exogenous gene encoding a desaturase. In such a case, the S. cerevisiae cell comprises at least one exogenous gene encoding a desaturase and at least one endogenous gene encoding a desaturase.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell further comprises an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding an acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), preferably ACC1 or mutated forms or evolved versions thereof having acetyl-CoA carboxylase activity.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell further comprises at least one exogenous gene encoding a long-chain acyl CoA synthetase, preferably selected from a group consisting of Arabidopsis thaliana LACS1, LACS2, LACS3, and codon optimized versions thereof.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell further comprising at least one exogenous gene encoding a non-phosphorylating NADP+-dependent glyceraldehydes-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPN), preferably a GAPN from Streptococcus mutans.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell further comprises at least one exogenous gene encoding a phosphoketolase, preferably a phosphoketolase from Aspergillus nidulans (xpkA and/or ack).

In an embodiment, the fungal cell is a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell genetically modified for reduced expression of and/or knock-out of the gene GDH1 encoding a NADP-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell is a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell genetically modified for overexpression of an endogenous GDH2 gene encoding a NAD-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell is genetically modified for reduced expression of and/or knock-out of non-essential pathway genes selected from a group consisting of acyl-CoA:sterol acyltransferase (ARE1, ARE2), diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGA1), lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase (LRO1), fatty-acyl coenzyme A oxidase (POX1), Elo3, Fat1, Faa1 and Faa4.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell further comprises at least one exogenous gene encoding a transport protein selected from a group consisting of an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) protein, a lipid transfer protein (LTP), a fatty acid transporter protein (FATP) and a plant wax ester transporter, preferably selected from the group consisting of ABCG11, ABCG12, LTPG1 and/or LTPG2.

Another aspect of the embodiments relates to a genetically modified fungal cell capable of producing a VLCFA or VLCFA derivative. The genetically fungal cell comprises at least one gene encoding a Mycobacterium fatty acid synthase.

In an embodiment, the at least one gene encoding said Mycobacterium fatty acid synthase (FAS) is selected from a group consisting of a gene encoding a FAS from Mycobacterium vaccae, a gene encoding a FAS from Mycobacterium diernhoferi 41002, a gene encoding a FAS from Mycobacterium neoaurum, a gene encoding a FAS from Mycobacterium parafortuitum PA-1, a gene encoding a FAS from Mycobacterium intracellulare, and codon optimized versions thereof.

In a particular embodiment, the fungal cell is a Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell genetically modified for reduced expression of and/or knock-out of the genes encoding Elo2 and Elo3. The S. cerevisiae cell also comprises a gene encoding a Mycobacterium vaccae fatty acid synthase, and a gene encoding a M. vaccae acyl-carrier protein synthase.

In another or additional particular embodiment, the fungal cell or S. cerevisiae cell further comprises at least one gene encoding a desaturase. The at least one gene encoding the desaturase is an endogenous gene overexpressing the desaturase and/or an exogenous gene encoding the desaturase. The previously described preferred examples of exogenous genes (SciFAD, ChDes9-1, ChDes9-2) and endogenous gene (Ole1) encoding desatures can also be applied to the present particular embodiment.

In an embodiment, the fungal cell of the various embodiments is preferably a genetically modified yeast cell, and more preferably a genetically modified Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell or a genetically modified Yarrowia lipolytica cell.

Yet another aspect of the embodiments relates a genetically modified fungal cell capable of producing a very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) and/or a VLCFA derivative. In this aspect, the genetically modified fungal cell comprises at least one gene encoding an elongase and at least one gene encoding a desaturase. The at least one gene encoding the elongase is an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding the elongase and/or an exogenous gene encoding the elongase. Correspondingly, the at least one gene encoding the desaturase is an endogenous gene overexpressing the desaturase and/or an exogenous gene encoding the desaturase.

Preferred examples of such elongases and desaturases can be selected among the embodiments described herein.

Still another aspect of the embodiments relates a genetically modified fungal cell capable of producing a very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) and/or a VLCFA derivative. In this aspect, the genetically modified fungal cell comprises at least one gene encoding a fatty acid synthase and at least one gene encoding a desaturase. The at least one gene encoding the fatty acid synthase is an overexpressed endogenous gene encoding the fatty acid synthase and/or an exogenous gene encoding the fatty acid synthase. Correspondingly, the at least one gene encoding the desaturase is an endogenous gene overexpressing the desaturase and/or an exogenous gene encoding the desaturase.

Preferred examples of such fatty acid synthases and desaturases can be selected among the embodiments described herein.

A further aspect of the embodiments relates to a a method for the production of a VLCFA and/or a VLCFA derivative. The method comprises culturing a genetically modified fungal cell according to any of the embodiments in a culture medium. The method also comprises isolating the VLCFA and/or the VLCFA derivative from the genetically modified fungal cell and/or from the culture medium.

In an embodiment, culturing the genetically modified fungal cell comprises culturing a genetically modified fungal cell comprising the fatty acyl-CoA reductase, the elongase and/or fatty acid synthase as described herein in the culture medium. In this embodiment, isolating the VLCFA and/or the VLCFA derivative comprises isolating a very long chain fatty alcohol, preferably docosanol, and more preferably N-docosanol C22:0, from the genetically modified fungal cell and/or from the culture medium.

In an embodiment, culturing the genetically modified fungal cell comprises culturing a genetically modified fungal cell comprising the fatty acyl-CoA reductase, the wax synthase, the elongase and/or fatty acid synthase as described herein in the culture medium. In this embodiment, isolating the VLCFA and/or the VLCFA derivative comprises isolating a wax ester from the genetically modified fungal cell and/or from the culture medium. The wax ester is preferably a wax ester of a C16:0 or C16:1 up to C28:0 or C28:1 fatty alcohol and a C16:0 or C16:1 up to C28:0 or C28:1 fatty acid.

In an embodiment, culturing the genetically modified fungal cell comprises culturing a genetically modified fungal cell comprising the Mycobacterium fatty acid synthase as described herein in the culture medium. In this embodiment, isolating the VLCFA and/or the VLCFA derivative comprises isolating a very long chain fatty acid, preferably eruric acid and/or nervonic acid, from the genetically modified fungal cell and/or the said culture medium.

One objective of the invention is to produce very long chain fatty acid derivatives like very long chain fatty alcohols or wax esters. In a first step fatty-acyl-CoA (C16:0, C18:0) is elongated to very long chain fatty-acyl-CoA, e.g. C22:0, either via the intrinsic yeast or heterologous elongase system or a heterologous or evolved FAS system. In a second step these very long chain fatty-acyl-CoA are reduced to the corresponding very long chain fatty alcohol by heterologously expressed FAR enzymes. The very long chain fatty acids and generated very long chain fatty alcohols are combined to the corresponding very long chain wax esters via expressing heterologous wax ester synthases.

In one embodiment the invention provides a genetically modified yeast that includes one or more exogenous genes that encode; (a) an elongase, or different components of an elongase system, e.g. from S. cerevisiae, Arabidopsis thaliana, Simmondsia chinensis, Brassica napus, Crambe abyssinica, Taxus baccata etc., and/or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, e.g. from Rhodosporidium toruloides, S. cerevisiae, Mycobacteria etc. and (b) a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), e.g. from Apis mellifera, Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Simmondsia chinensis, Triticum aestivum, Arabidopsis thaliana, Marinobacter algicola DG893, Marinobacter adhaerens HP15, Taxus baccata, Euglena gracilis, Oryza sativa, Gallus gallus, Yponomeuta evonymellus, Mus musculus etc., wherein the yeast produces at least one fatty alcohol, such as docosanol, preferably N-docosanol C22:0.

In a particular embodiment the elongase, or different components of an elongase system, is a yeast, plant, insect, or prokaryotic elongase.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one gene encoding yeast elongase Elo1 and/or Elo2, including but not limited to from S. cerevisiae.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one gene encoding Fas1 or Fas2 and/or mutants thereof.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one or more genes encoding different components of the S. cerevisiae elongase systems, including but not limited to elongases, e.g., KCS, 3-keto acyl-CoA reductase, enoyl-CoA reductase, 3-hydroxy acyl-CoA dehydratase.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one or more, exogenous genes encoding part of, or the entire elongase systems from plants, including respective elongases, reductases and dehydratases.

In a particular embodiment, fatty reductases derived from Apis mellifera, Arabidopsis thaliana, Marinobacter aquaeolei are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, FAS derived from Mycobacterium and/or yeast evolved FAS are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, elongase from S. cerevisiae, Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica napus, Crambe abyssinica Lunaria annua (LaKCS), Simmondsia chinensis are preferred.

In another embodiment, the invention provides a method of producing a recombinant microorganism that includes one or more exogenous genes that encode; (a) an elongase, or different components of an elongase system, e.g. from Arabidopsis thaliana, Simmondsia chinensis, Brassica napus, Crambe abyssinica, Taxus baccata etc., and/or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, e.g. from Rhodosporidium toruloides, S. cerevisiae, Mycobacteria etc., and (b) a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), e.g. from Apis mellifera, Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Simmondsia chinensis, Triticum aestivum, Arabidopsis thaliana, Marinobacter algicola DG893, Marinobacter adhaerens HP15, Taxus baccata, Euglena gracilis, Oryza sativa, Gallus gallus, Yponomeuta evonymellus, Mus musculus etc., wherein the yeast produces at least one fatty alcohol, such as docosanol, preferably N-docosanol C22:0.

Another objective of the invention is to produce very long chain fatty acid derivatives like very long chain fatty acids. In a first step fatty-acyl-CoA (C16:0, C18:0) is desaturated towards preferably C18:1 and elongated to very long chain fatty-acyl-CoA, e.g. C22:1, either via the intrinsic yeast or heterologous elongase system or a heterologous or evolved FAS system. In a second step VLCF acyl-CoA is modified towards free VLCFA via intrinsic thioesterases or by overexpression of heterologous thioesterases such as mammalian ACOT genes, for instance, Homo sapiens ACOT2 (GenBank: NP_006812.3), Homo sapiens ACOT9 (Genbank: NP_001028755.2), Rattus norvegicus ACOT2 (GenBank: NP_620262.2) or Rattus norvegicus ACOT1 (Genbank: NP_112605.1)

In an embodiment, the invention provides a genetically modified yeast that includes one or more exogenous genes that encode; (a) an elongase, or different components of an elongase system, e.g. from Arabidopsis thaliana, or Simmondsia chinensis, Taxus baccata, Brassica napus, Crambe abyssinica etc., and/or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, e.g. from Rhodosporidium toruloides, S. cerevisiae, Mycobacteria etc., and; (b) a desaturase, e.g. from S. cerevisiae, Simmondsia chinensis, Calanus hyperboreus, etc., wherein the yeast produces at least one fatty acid derivative, such as erucic acid, preferably C22:1 or nervonic acid, C24:1.

In a particular embodiment the elongase, or different components of an elongase system, is a yeast, plant, insect, or prokaryotic elongase.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one gene encoding yeast elongase Elo1 and/or Elo2, including but not limited to from S. cerevisiae.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one gene encoding Fas1 or Fas2 and/or mutants thereof.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one or more genes encoding different components of the S. cerevisiae elongase systems, including but not limited to elongases, e.g., KCS, 3-keto acyl-CoA reductase, enoyl-CoA reductase, 3-hydroxy acyl-CoA dehydratase.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one or more, exogenous genes encoding part of, or the entire elongase systems from plants, including elongases, reductases and dehydratases.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one desaturase gene encoding Ole1, ChDes9_2 or other desaturases.

In a particular embodiment, FAS derived from Mycobacterium and/or yeast evolved FAS are preferred.

In a particular embodiment elongase from S. cerevisiae, Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica napus, Crambe abyssinica Lunaria annua (LaKCS), Simmondsia chinensis are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, desaturase from S. cerevisiae is preferred.

In another embodiment, the invention provides a method of producing a recombinant microorganism that includes one or more exogenous genes that encode; (a) an elongase, or different components of an elongase system, e.g. from Arabidopsis thaliana, or Simmondsia chinensis, Taxus baccata, Brassica napus, Crambe abyssinica etc. and/or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, e.g. from Rhodosporidium toruloides, S. cerevisiae, Mycobacteria etc. and; (b) a desaturase, e.g. from S. cerevisiae, Simmondsia chinensis, Calanus hyperboreus etc., wherein the yeast produces at least one fatty acid derivative, such as erucic acid, preferably C22:1 or nervonic acid, C24:1.

Yet another objective of the invention is to produce very long chain fatty acid derivatives like wax esters.

In an embodiment, the invention provides a genetically modified yeast that includes one or more exogenous genes that encode; (a) a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), e.g. from Apis mellifera, Marinobacter aquaeoli, Marinobacter algicola, Marinobacter adhaerens, Simmondsia chinensis Triticum aestivum, Arabidopsis thaliana, Taxus baccata, Euglena gracilis, Oryza sativa, Gallus gallus, Yponomeuta evonymellus, Mus musculus etc., and; (b) a wax synthase, e.g. from Acinetobacter baylyi, Arabidopsis thaliana, Euglena gracilis, Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus DSM 8798, Simmondsia chinensis and Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, Mycobacteria, Streptomyces coelicolor etc., wherein the yeast produces at least one fatty acid derivative, such as a wax ester, preferably with C16 (C16):1 up to C28(C28):1 as the fatty alcohol (A side) and C16(C16):1 up to C28(C28):1 as the fatty acid (B side).

In a particular embodiment, fatty reductases derived from Apis mellifera, Arabidopsis thaliana, Marinobacter aquaeolei are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, wax ester synthates derived from Arabidopsis thaliana, Simmondsia chinensis, Euglena gracilis are preferred.

In another embodiment, the invention provides a method of producing a recombinant microorganism that includes one or more exogenous genes that encode; (a) a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), e.g. from Apis mellifera, Marinobacter aquaeoli, Marinobacter algicola, Marinobacter adhaerens, Simmondsia chinensis Triticum aestivum, Arabidopsis thaliana, Taxus baccata, Euglena gracilis, Oryza sativa, Gallus gallus, Yponomeuta evonymellus, Mus musculus etc. and; (b) a wax synthase, e.g. from Acinetobacter baylyi, Arabidopsis thaliana, Euglena gracilis, Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus, Simmondsia chinensis, Marinobacter aquaeoli, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, Mycobacteria, Streptomyces coelicolor etc., wherein the yeast produces at least one fatty acid derivative, such as a wax ester, preferably with C16 (C16):1 up to C28(C28):1 as the fatty alcohol (A side) and C16(C16):1 up to C28(C28):1 as the fatty acid (B side).

In a further embodiment, the invention provides a genetically modified yeast that includes one or more exogenous genes that encode; (a) an elongase, or different components of an elongase system, e.g. from Arabidopsis thaliana, or Simmondsia chinensis, Taxus baccata, Brassica napus, or Crambe abyssinica etc.) and/or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, e.g. from Rhodosporidium toruloides, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Mycobacteria etc., and; (b) a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), e.g. from Apis mellifera, Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Simmondsia chinensis, Triticum aestivum, Arabidopsis thaliana, Marinobacter algicola DG893, Marinobacter adhaerens HP15, Taxus baccata, Euglena gracilis, Oryza sativa, Gallus gallus, Yponomeuta evonymellus, Mus musculus etc., and; (c) a wax synthase, e.g. from Acinetobacter baylyi, Arabidopsis thaliana, Euglena gracilis, Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus DSM 8798, Simmondsia chinensis and Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, Mycobacteria, Streptomyces coelicolor etc., wherein the yeast produces at least one fatty acid derivative, preferably with C22 (C20):1 as the fatty alcohol (A side) and C20(C22):1 as the fatty acid (B side).

In a particular embodiment, fatty reductases derived from Apis mellifera, Arabidopsis thaliana, Marinobacter aquaeolei are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, wax ester synthates derived from Arabidopsis thaliana, Simmondsia chinensis, Euglena gracilis are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, FAS derived from Mycobacterium and/or yeast evolved FAS are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, elongase derived from S. cerevisiae, Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica napus, Crambe abyssinica Lunaria annua (LaKCS), Simmondsia chinensis are preferred.

In another embodiment, the invention provides a method of producing a recombinant microorganism that includes one or more exogenous genes that encode; (a) an elongase, or different components of an elongase system, e.g. from Arabidopsis thaliana, or Simmondsia chinensis, Taxus baccata, Brassica napus, or Crambe abyssinica etc.) and/or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, e.g. from Rhodosporidium toruloides, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Mycobacteria etc., and; (b) a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), e.g. from Apis mellifera, Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Simmondsia chinensis, Triticum aestivum, Arabidopsis thaliana, Marinobacter algicola DG893, Marinobacter adhaerens HP15, Taxus baccata, Euglena gracilis, Oryza sativa, Gallus gallus, Yponomeuta evonymellus, Mus musculus etc., and; (c) a wax synthase, e.g. from Acinetobacter baylyi, Arabidopsis thaliana, Euglena gracilis, Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus DSM 8798, Simmondsia chinensis and Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, Mycobacteria, Streptomyces coelicolor etc., wherein the yeast produces at least one fatty acid derivative, preferably with C22 (C20):1 as the fatty alcohol (A side) and C20(C22):1 as the fatty acid (B side).

In still another embodiment, the invention provides a genetically modified yeast that includes one or more exogenous genes that encode; (a) an elongase, or different components of an elongase system, e.g. from Arabidopsis thaliana, or Simmondsia chinensis, Taxus baccata, Brassica napus, or Crambe abyssinica etc., and/or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, e.g. from Rhodosporidium toruloides, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Mycobacteria etc., and; (b) a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), e.g. from Apis mellifera, Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Simmondsia chinensis, Triticum aestivum, Arabidopsis thaliana, Marinobacter algicola DG893, Marinobacter adhaerens HP15, Taxus baccata, Euglena gracilis, Oryza sativa, Gallus gallus, Yponomeuta evonymellus, Mus musculus etc., and; (c) a desaturase, e.g. from S. cerevisiae, Simmondsia chinensis, Calanus hyperboreus, etc., and; (d) a wax synthase, e.g. from Acinetobacter baylyi, Arabidopsis thaliana, Euglena gracilis, Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus DSM 8798, Simmondsia chinensis and Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, Mycobacteria, Streptomyces coelicolor etc., wherein the yeast produces at least one fatty acid derivative, such as jojoba oil, preferably with C22 (C20):1 as the fatty alcohol (A side) and C20(C22):1 as the fatty acid (B side).

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one exogenous gene encoding plant desaturase from Simmondsia chinensis.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one gene encoding desaturase from S. cerevisiae.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes at least one gene encoding ChDes9-1 desaturase from Calanus hyperboreus.

In particular embodiments, the recombinant yeast includes an elongase, FAS and/or FAR as previously exemplified in connection with production of very long chain fatty alcohols and very long chain fatty acids.

In a particular embodiment, fatty reductase derived from Apis mellifera, Arabidopsis thaliana, Marinobacter aquaeolei are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, wax ester synthates derived from Arabidopsis thaliana, Simmondsia chinensis, Euglena gracilis are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, FAS derived from Mycobacterium and/or yeast evolved FAS are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, elongase derived from S. cerevisiae, Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica napus, Crambe abyssinica Lunaria annua (LaKCS), Simmondsia chinensis are preferred.

In a particular embodiment, desaturase derived from S. cerevisiae is preferred.

In another embodiment, the invention provides a method of producing a recombinant microorganism that includes one or more exogenous genes that encode; (a) an elongase, or different components of an elongase system, e.g. from Arabidopsis thaliana, or Simmondsia chinensis, Taxus baccata, Brassica napus, or Crambe abyssinica etc., and/or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, e.g. from Rhodosporidium toruloides, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Mycobacteria etc., and; (b) a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), e.g. from Apis mellifera, Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Simmondsia chinensis, Triticum aestivum, Arabidopsis thaliana, Marinobacter algicola DG893, Marinobacter adhaerens HP15, Taxus baccata, Euglena gracilis, Oryza sativa, Gallus gallus, Yponomeuta evonymellus, Mus musculus etc., and; (c) a desaturase, e.g. from S. cerevisiae, Simmondsia chinensis, Calanus hyperboreus, etc., and; (d) a wax synthase, e.g. from Acinetobacter baylyi, Arabidopsis thaliana, Euglena gracilis, Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus DSM 8798, Simmondsia chinensis and Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8, Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, Mycobacteria, Streptomyces coelicolor etc., wherein the yeast produces at least one fatty acid derivative, such as jojoba oil, preferably with C22 (C20):1 as the fatty alcohol (A side) and C20(C22):1 as the fatty acid (B side).

In additional aspects of the invention, the genetically modified yeast of the invention can be further modified to express heterologous fatty acid biosynthetic polypeptides for increased production of fatty acid derivatives. Non-limiting examples of genes encoding such heterologous polypeptides include ACC1, gapN, e.g. derived from Streptococcus mutans, OLE1 and LACS1, LACS2, LACS3, derived from Arabidopsis thaliana.

NADPH is a cofactor in the synthesis of fatty acids. To increase the availability of NADPH for fatty acid biosynthesis, the genetically modified yeast of the invention can be further modified for heterologous expression of non-phosphorylating NADP+-dependent glyceraldehydes-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPN), e.g. from Streptococcus mutans, or a phosphoketolase pathway. In other aspects, the yeast can be modified to disrupt GDH1 encoding NADP-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase. In still other embodiments, the yeast of the invention can be further modified to overexpress GDH2 encoding NAD-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase. Also combinations of these embodiments are possible, i.e. the yeast is modified for i) heterologous expression of non-phosphorylating NADP+-dependent GAPN, ii) disruption of GDH1 encoding NADP-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase and/or iii) overexpression of GDH2 encoding NAD-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes the expression of at least one gene encoding an acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), including but not limited to ACC1 and mutated forms thereof as previously described (Shi et al., 2014), to increase the precursor supply of malonyl-CoA for the production of very long chain fatty acids.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes heterologous expression of at least one gene encoding a system to increase NADPH supply for elongation and reduction reactions, including but not limited to expression of GAPN, or a phosphoketolase pathway e.g. from Aspergillus nidulans (heterologous expression of xpkA and ack).

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes heterologous expression of at least one gene encoding a desaturase, to increase the production of Δ9 unsaturated very long chain fatty acids, including precursors for erucic acid, nervonic acid and jojoba oil.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes heterologous expression of one or more genes of LACS1, LACS2, LACS3 derived from Arabidopsis thaliana to facilitate an activation of long chain fatty acids with CoA. This is important for subsequent reactions catalyzed by reductases and wax ester synthases in creating very long chain fatty alcohols and wax esters.

Also combinations of these particular embodiments are possible and within the scope of the embodiments.

In further aspects of this invention, the yeast strains of the invention can additionally, or alternatively, comprise genetic modifications that eliminate or reduce non-essential pathways. Such modifications can eliminate or reduce the utilization or consumption of fatty acids by enzymes or pathways that compete with the production of fatty acid derivatives such as fatty alcohols, fatty acid alkyl esters etc in the recombinant yeast strains. Exemplary embodiments of such non-essential pathways can include but are not limited to storage lipid (triacylglycerols, TAGs; sterol esters, SEs) formation, β-oxidation. In particular embodiments, storage lipid formation can be eliminated or reduced by disrupting the genes encoding, for example, acyl-CoA:sterol acyltransferase (ARE1, ARE2), diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGA1), and/or lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase (LRO1). In other embodiments, β-oxidation can be eliminated or reduced by disrupting the genes encoding, for example, fatty-acyl coenzyme A oxidase (POX1). In yet another embodiment, the recombinant yeast strains of this invention can have reduced expression or activity of one or more additional enzymes that reduce the biosynthesis of the desired fatty acid derived products, including but not limited to genes encoding Ole1, Elo3, Fat1, Faa1 and Faa4.

Therefore, in a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes reduced expression of and/or knock-out of at least one gene from competing pathways, including but not limited to TAGs, SEs, β-oxidation.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes reduced expression and/or knock-out of at least one gene encoding Ole1, to increase the production of saturated fatty acids and very long chain fatty acids such as docosanol.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes reduced expression of and/or knock-out of at least one gene encoding Fas1, for example, by putting the yeast FAS1 gene under a promoter such as pHXT1.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes reduced expression of and/or knock-out of at least one gene encoding Elo3, in order to allow accumulation of C22.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes reduced expression of and/or knock-out of at least one gene encoding Fat1, in order to allow accumulation of very long chain fatty acids of C24.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes reduced expression of and/or knock-out of at least one gene encoding Faa1 and/or Faa4.

Combinations of the above exemplified gene knock-outs or expression reductions are possible and within the scope of the embodiments.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast is the JV03 strain (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 ura3-52 are1Δ dga1Δ are2Δ Iro1Δ pox1Δ).

Combinations of the above exemplified heterologous gene expressions and gene knock-outs are also possible and within the scope of the embodiments.

In a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes expression of a gene encoding acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), including but not limited to ACC1 and mutated forms thereof as previously described by (Shi et al., 2014) in combination with knock-down of Elo3.

Transporter proteins, such as ATP-binding cassette (ABC) proteins can be introduced into a host that includes an exogenous fatty acyl-CoA reductase gene, fatty aldehyde reductase gene, or carboxylic acid reductase gene. For example, ABC transporters of Arabidopsis such as ABCG11 and/or ABCG12 as well as lipid transfer proteins (LTPs) such as LTPG1 and LTPG2 can be introduced into a host cell. In some embodiments, fatty acid transporter (FATP) genes from species including Saccharomyces, Drosophila, Mycobacteria, or mammalian species can be introduced into a host cell. In some embodiments, a transporter protein increases the amount of fatty alcohols or fatty alcohol derivatives released into the growth medium of a microorganism. Expression of a transporter protein can in some embodiments also increase production of fatty alcohols or fatty alcohol derivatives by a host strain. One embodiment the invention herein uses a plant wax ester transporter. For example, ABCG12/CER5 from Arabidopsis facilitates the export of very long chain aldehydes, ketones, alcohols, alkanes, esters and other possible fatty acids derivatives.

Therefore, in a particular embodiment, the recombinant yeast includes heterologous expression of at least one gene encoding ABCG11, ABCG12, LTPG1 and/or LTPG2.

At the same time genes encoding for intrinsic yeast transporters, including ABC transporters, such as ABCG11 and ABCG12, can be deleted to avoid secretion of particular products of interest and increase intracellular accumulation.

Other aspects of the invention provides methods for the production of VLCFA derivatives in genetically modified yeast, comprising culturing a genetically modified yeast of the invention and isolating at least one VLCFA derivative, such as very long chain fatty acid, very long chain fatty alcohol and/or wax ester, from the microorganism or the growth media.

Therefore, in one embodiment, the method includes culturing a microorganism that includes at least one exogenous gene encoding an elongase or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system and a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), that increases the amount of very long chain fatty alcohol products released into the media and isolating at least one very long chain fatty alcohol from the microorganism or the growth media.

In a particular embodiment, the fatty alcohol is docosanol, preferably N-docosanol C22:0.

In another embodiment, the method includes culturing a microorganism that includes at least one exogenous gene encoding an elongase or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system and a desaturase, that increases the amount of very long chain fatty acids released into the media and isolating at least one very long chain fatty acid from the microorganism or the growth media.

In a particular embodiment, the fatty acid is erucic acid, preferably C22:1 or nervonic acid, C24:1.

In yet another embodiment, the method includes culturing a microorganism that includes at least one exogenous gene encoding a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR) and a wax synthase, that increases the amount of wax esters released into the media, and isolating at least one wax ester from the microorganism or the growth media.

In yet another embodiment, the method includes culturing a microorganism that includes at least one exogenous gene encoding an elongase or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), and a wax synthase, that increases the amount of wax esters released into the media, and isolating at least one wax ester from the microorganism or the growth media.

In yet another embodiment, the method includes culturing a microorganism that includes at least one exogenous gene encoding an elongase or a fatty acid synthase (FAS) system, a very long chain fatty acid reductase, such as fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR), a desaturase and a wax synthase, that increases the amount of wax esters released into the media, and isolating at least one wax ester from the microorganism or the growth media.

In a particular embodiment, the wax ester is jojoba oil, preferably comprising C22 (C20):1 as the fatty alcohol (A side) and C20(C22):1 as the fatty acid (B side).

The invention will now be described with reference to the following examples. It should be appreciated that these examples are not intended to limit the scope of the claims to the invention, but are rather intended to be exemplary of certain embodiments. Any variations in the exemplified methods that occur to the skilled artisan are intended to fall within the scope of the invention.

### EXAMPLES

In the examples below references are made to several primers, nucleotide and/or protein sequences, these primers, nucleotide and/or protein sequences are to be found in Table 4.

**Example 1**

Expression of a Wax Ester Biosynthetic Pathway Combining Heterologous Reductases (AmFAR, MaFAldhR, SciFAR or TaFAR) and Wax Ester Synthases (AbWS, AtWS, EgWS or SciWS) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

This example includes the formation of wax esters in strains of S. cerevisiae by heterologous expression of different combinations of a fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR) and a wax ester synthase (WS). The FAR is responsible for formation of a fatty alcohol based on a fatty acyl-CoA and the WS catalyzes the esterification of the formed alcohol with a second fatty acyl-CoA molecule (see FIG. 2). The different combinations of the two enzymes were cloned into the expression vector pSP-GM2 (SEQ ID NO1, Plasmid ID 1) (Partow et al., 2010) and transformed into the yeast strains CEN.PK 113-5D (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 ura3-52), CEN.PK113-11C (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 his3Δ1 ura 3-52) pox1Δ and JV03 (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 ura3-52 are1Δ dga1Δ are2Δ lro1Δ pox1Δ). Control strains harboring the empty plasmid pSP-GM2 were also constructed.

The FAR tested in this study include those from Apis mellifera (AmFAR) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 2; accession number ADJ56408), Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8 (MaFAldhR) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 3; accession number YP_959486), Simmondsia chinensis (SciFAR) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 4; accession number AAD38039), Triticum aestivum (TaFAR) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 5; accession number CAD30692), Arabidopsis thaliana (At5FAR) (codon optimized for yeast: SEQ ID NO: 42)

In addition, FAR1 and FAR4 from Arabidopsis thaliana (At) (SEQ ID NO: 6; accession number NP_197642.1 and SEQ ID NO: 7; accession number NP_190040.3, respectively) are tested. Moreover, the putative reductases from Marinobacter algicola DG893 (SEQ ID NO: 8, accession number ZP_01892457.1) and Marinobacter adhaerens HP15 (SEQ ID NO: 9; accession number ADP96574) which both have 78% identity to the Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8 protein (accession number YP_959486) are included in the study.

The WS in this study include those from Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1 (AbWS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 10; accession number ENV55676), Arabidopsis thaliana (AtWS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 11; accession number NP_568547), Euglena gracilis (EgWS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 12; accession number ADI60058), Marinobacter hydrocarbonoclasticus DSM 8798 (MhWS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 13; accession number ABO21021), Simmondsia chinensis (SciWS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 14; accession number AF149919) and Marinobacter aquaeolei VT8 (SEQ ID NO: 15; accession number YP_957462).

The codon-optimized sequences for the genes AmFAR, MaFAldhR, SciFAR, TaFAR, AtWS, EgWS and SciWS were obtained from GenScript (860 Centennial Ave., Piscataway, N.J. 08854, U.S.), containing the Kozak sequence AAAAAA directly in front of the start codon ATG and restriction sites on both ends of the gene (NotI & SpeI in case of the FAR and BamHI & SalI in case of the WS) and cloned into the pUC57 vector (Plasmid ID 2).

In a first approach, the genes coding for the AmFAR, MaFAldhR, SciFAR and TaFAR were cloned into pSP-GM2 via the restriction enzymes NotI & SpeI, leading to the plasmids pSP-GM2::AmFAR, pSP-GM2::MaFAldhR, pSP-GM2::SciFAR and pSP-GM2::TaFAR (Plasmid ID 3-6).

The genes coding for the WS AtWS, EgWS and SciWS were cut out of the pUC57 vector using the restriction enzymes BamHI & SalI and were ligated into the plasmids pSPGM2::SciFAR and pSPGM2::TaFAR which have been cut with the respective restriction enzymes before. This led to the plasmids pSPGM2::SciFAR::AtWS, pSPGM2::SciFAR::EgWS, pSPGM2::SciFAR::SciWS, pSPGM2::TaFAR::AtWS, pSPGM2::TaFAR::EgWS and pSPGM2::TaFAR::SciWS (Plasmid ID 7-12). The genes AbWS and MhWS were amplified with specific primers (SEQ ID NO: 43-SEQ ID NO: 46) based on the plasmids pSPB1 (codon optimized AbWS gene cloned into the HindIII & BamHI restriction sites of pSP-GM2) (Plasmid ID 13) and pSPB2N (codon optimized MhWS gene cloned into the NotI & SacI restriction sites of pSP-GM2) (Plasmid ID 14).

The Gibson assembly method (Gibson et al., 2009) (SEQ ID NO: 47-SEQ ID NO: 56) was used to construct the plasmids pSPGM2::AmFAR::AbWS, pSPGM2::AmFAR::AtWS, pSPGM2::AmFAR::EgWS, pSPGM2::AmFAR::MhWS, pSPGM2::AmFAR::SciWS, pSPGM2::MaFAldhR::AbWS, pSPGM2::MaFAldhR::AtWS, pSPGM2::MaFAldhR::EgWS, pSPGM2::MaFAldhR::MhWS and pSPGM2::MaFAldhR::SciWS (Plasmid ID 15-24).

All plasmids were transformed into Escherichia coli DH5a by chemical transformation. The colonies carrying the desired plasmids were verified by colony PCR (SEQ ID NO: 57-SEQ ID NO: 60).

After isolation of the plasmids and verification of each gene by sequencing (SEQ ID NO: 61-SEQ ID NO: 76) (Eurofins Genomics, Ebersberg, Germany), they were transferred to the yeast strains CEN.PK 113-5D (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 ura3-52), CEN.PK113-11C (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 his3Δ1 ura 3-52) pox1A and JV03 (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 ura3-52 are1Δ dga1Δ are2Δ lro1Δ pox1A) by chemical transformation (Gietz and Woods, 2002).

Three independent clones were isolated for each of the producer and control strains by streak purification onto fresh SD-Ura 2% glucose plates. Successful transformation of the producer was verified by colony PCR (SEQ ID NO: 51-SEQ ID NO: 66). Each clone was grown in precultures of 5 mL in SD-URA+2% glucose medium for 2 days, inoculated to fresh SD-URA+2% glucose medium at an OD600 of 0.05-0.1 in 25 ml in 250 ml shake flasks. The cultures were incubated at 30° C. and 200 rpm. After 48 h, cell pellets were collected by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 1000 rcf and washed twice with 5 ml phosphate buffer (10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.5). Extraction of lipids was carried out as described before with the exception that the final sample was dissolved in hexane (instead of chloroform/methanol) (Khoomrung et al., 2013). Subsequently, 2 μl injections were analyzed using a gas chromatograph (Focus GC, ThermoScientific) mass spectrometer (DSQII ThermoScientific) equipped with a ZB-5MS Guardian (L=30 m, ID 0.25 mm, df=0.25 μm, Phenomenex) column. The inlet temperature was set to 280° C., the helium (carrier) gas flow to 1 ml/min splitless. The initial oven temperature was set to 50° C. and held for 1 minute. Then the temperature was ramped to 280° C. by 25° C./min. In a second step the temperature was ramped to 350° C. by 10° C./min and hold for 5 min. The mass transfer line temperature was set to 250° C., the ion source temperature was set to 250° C. and a full scan for m/z of 50 to 650 was performed.

Exemplary gas chromatogram spectra of one independent clone of a control strain (JV03 pSP-GM2) and five producing strains (JV03 pSP-GM2::AmFAR, JV03 pSP-GM2::AmFAR::AbWS, JV03 pSP-GM2::AmFAR::AtWS, JV03 pSP-GM2::AmFAR::EgWS, JV03 pSP-GM2::AmFAR::SciWS, JV03 pSP-GM2::MaFAldhR::SciWS) are shown in FIG. 3 and FIG. 5. Production of long chain fatty alcohols (JV03 pSP-GM2::AmFAR) and consumption of these towards wax esters (JV03 pSP-GM2::AmFAR::AtWS, JV03 pSP-GM2::AmFAR::SciWS, JV03 pSP-GM2::MaFAldhR::SciWS) is indicated in the figure legends. FIG. 4 shows the relative amount of fatty alcohols produced in these strains.

In this example we showed the formation of wax esters and fatty alcohols in strains of S. cerevisiae by heterologous expression of different combinations of a fatty acyl-CoA reductase (FAR) and a wax ester synthase (WS). A range of wax esters, e.g. C16:0-C18:0, and fatty alcohols, e.g. C16:0, C18:0, C18:1, were shown to be successfully produced.

**Example 2**

Heterologous Expression of Various β-Ketoacyl-CoA Synthases (KCS) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae to Enhance VLCFA Synthesis and Enable the Synthesis of VLC Fatty Alcohols and Wax Esters

In this example heterologously expressed β-ketoacyl-CoA synthase (KCS, FAE) genes are introduced into S. cerevisiae. Their gene products catalyze the first step of the elongation of long-chain fatty acids (LCFA) to VLCFA (FIG. 6). S. cerevisiae possesses three different intrinsic KCS enzymes: Elo1, Elo2 and Elo3. Elo1 is responsible for the elongation of C14:0 to C16:0, Elo2 for the elongation up to C24 and Elo3 for the elongation from C24 to C26. Since the major fatty acids detected in S. cerevisiae are C14:1, C16:1 and C18:1, it is possible to assume that Elo2 and Elo3 are less active in S. cerevisiae.

To enhance the pool of VLCFAs, the intrinsic KCS Elo2 from S. cerevisiae (accession number NP_009963.1), the KCS from Simmondsia chinensis (accession number AAC49186.1) or the FAE1 from Arabidopsis thaliana (accession number AAA70154.1) (Trenkamp et al., 2004), the KCS from Brassica napus (BnKCS) (accession number AF490459), the KCS from Crambe abyssinica (CaKCS) (accession number AY793549), the KCS from Cardamine graeca (CgKCS) (accession number ACJ61778.1), the KCS from Lunaria annua (LaKCS) (accession number EU871787), or the KCS from Tropaeolum majus (TmKCS) (accession number AAL99199.1), which are all able to produce VLCFAs are overexpressed in S. cerevisiae. Simultaneously, ELO3 is deleted. Background strains of CEN.PK 113-5D elo3A, CEN.PK113-11Cpox1Δelo3A and JV03 (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 ura3-52 are1Δ dga1Δ are2Δ lro1Δ pox1A) elo3Δ are created via using a self-excisable deletion cassette, containing KanMX as a marker, flanked by loxP sites and a cre-recombinase cloned behind the galactose inducible promoter PGAL1 (Pan et al., 2011). For gene specific deletion of ELO3 500 bp fragments upstream (SEQ ID NO: 111, SEQ ID NO: 112) and downstream (SEQ ID NO: 113, SEQ ID NO: 114) ELO3 were amplified and fused via Gibson cloning to the particular parts of the deletion cassette.

In particular, for deletion of the elo3 gene, an approach similar to the one described by Agaphonov & Alexandrov 2014. The first linear fragment contained a 502 bp upstream elo3 region and part of the KanMX marker under control of the TEF promoter (deletion cassette 1). The second linear fragment contained part of the KanMX marker, the Cre recombinase under control of the GAL promoter and a 500 bp downstream elo3 region (deletion cassette 2). The KanMX marker and the Cre recombinase were flanked by loxP sites. After integration of the two fragments into the genome of S. cerevisiae by homologous recombination at the elo3 locus, the Cre recombinase was induced on galactose medium, leading to its own excision as well as excision of the KanMX marker, only leaving one loxP sequence behind. The oligonucleotides used for amplification of the up- and downstream regions of elo3, amplification of the deletion cassettes are shown in Table 1 (SEQ ID NO: 111-SEQ ID NO: 120). The elo3 deletion cassettes were used to construct the strains CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ, CEN.PK113-11C pox1Δ elo3Δ and JV03 elo3Δ.

In addition to the deletion of elo3, the gene coding for the mutated ACC1p** of S. cerevisiae, which includes two amino acid substitutions at positions 659 and 1157; S659A and S1157A (SEQ ID NO: 27; accession number NP_014413.1) (Shi et al., 2014), was integrated into the genome of the CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ, CEN.PK113-11C pox1A elo3Δ and JV03 elo3Δ, leading to CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ ACC1**, CEN.PK113-11C pox1A elo3Δ ACC1** and JV03 elo3Δ ACC1**.

For this integration, a plasmid containing the ACC1** gene under control of the TEF promoter and a KanMX marker for selection was constructed (pCfB353::ACC1**) (Plasmid ID 37), based on the plasmid pCfB353 described in Jensen et al., 2014. In this plasmid, the ACC1** gene is flanked by regions guiding the integration of the fragment into the region 194944-195980 of chromosome X. The plasmid was linearized by a NotI digestion and the desired fragment was gel purified and transformed into the desired yeast strain by chemical transformation. The oligonucleotides used for verification of the integration of the ACC1** gene into the genome of S. cerevisiae are listed in table 1 (SEQ ID NO: 121-SEQ ID NO: 126).

In addition a background strain overexpressing ELO2 is also constructed by exchanging the natural promoter with a constitutively active TEF1 promoter in the genome of CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ, and JV03 elo3Δ creating strain CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ::TEF-ELO2, and JV03 elo3Δ::TEF-ELO2. This is done by using the CRISPR/Cas9 system as described in (Jakočiūnas et al., 2015).

The overexpression of KCS gene candidates is done by ordering particular yeast codon optimized genes, cloning these combinations via Gibson cloning under a constitutively active promoter and terminator control on pSP-GM2 in combination with respective reductase/wax ester synthases and desaturases described in Example 1 and Example 3 respectively.

Screening Different Elongases in Combination with Desaturase

To enhance the pool of VLCFAs, the intrinsic KCS Elo2p from S. cerevisiae (SEQ ID NO: 16; accession number NP_009963.1), the Fae1p from Arabidopsis thaliana (AtFae1p) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 17; accession number AAA70154.1), the KCS from Brassica napus (BnKCS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 18; accession number AF490459), the KCS from Crambe abyssinica (CaKCS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 19; accession number AY793549), the KCS from Cardamine graeca (CgKCS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 20; accession number ACJ61778.1), the KCS from Lunaria annua (LaKCS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 21; accession number EU871787), the KCS from Simmondsia chinensis (SciKCS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 22; accession number AAC49186.1) or the KCS from Tropaeolum majus (TmKCS) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 23; accession number AAL99199.1), which are all able to produce VLCFAs, were overexpressed in S. cerevisiae. The KCS enzymes were combined with the intrinsic Δ9-desaturase of S. cerevisiae, Ole1p (SEQ ID NO: 24; accession number EIW10301.1), to increase the amount of monounsaturated, VLCFA. The intrinsic KCS Elo2 from S. cerevisiae was additionally combined with the truncated Δ9-desaturase from Simmondsia chinensis (SciFAD) (codon optimized for S. cerevisiae: SEQ ID NO: 25; accession number AAA33932.1).

The genes coding for Ole1p, SciFAD and the different KCS enzymes were amplified with primers introducing a kozak sequence in front of the ATG start codon and different overhangs at the 5′ and 3′ end of each gene which are compatible to promoter and terminator sequences, respectively (SEQ ID NO: 77-SEQ ID NO: 90). The primers used to amplify the promoters pTPI, pTDH3, pHXT7, pPGK1 and pTEF1 as well as the terminators pYX212t, FBA1t, CYC1t, TDH2t and ADH1t, are listed in Table 4 (SEQ ID NO: 91-SEQ ID NO: 110).

Plasmids, containing the desired genes, were constructed by using the plasmid backbone pYX212 (SEQ ID NO: 26, Plasmid ID 25) and a modular pathway engineering strategy involving the electroporation of competent yeast cells (Zhou et al., 2012). All plasmids were first assembled in S. cerevisiae CEN.PK 113-5D and then extracted by using the Zymoprep Yeast Plasmid Miniprep II kit (Nordic Biolabs) transformed into E. coli DHSoli 113-5D. After purification of the plasmid, the plasmids were verified by restriction analysis and sequencing.

The resulting plasmids were: pYX212::Ole1p, pYX212::Elo2, pYX212::Ole1p::Elo2, pYX212::SciFAD::Elo2, pYX212::AtFae1::Ole1, pYX212::BnKCS::Ole1, pYX212::CaKCS::Ole1, pYX212::CgKCS::Ole1, pYX212::LaKCS::Ole1, pYX212::SciKCS::Ole1 and pYX212::TmKCS::Ole1 (Plasmid ID 26-36). Finally, the plasmids were transformed into the desired yeast strains. Yeast competent cells were prepared and transformed with 1 μg of plasmid DNA according to the lithium acetate/single-stranded carrier DNA/polyethylene glycol method (Gietz and Woods, 2002).

After cultivation, samples were analyzed using the same conditions as described in Example 1. Results are shown in FIG. 17, comparing particular controls with strains overexpressing ELO2, AtFAE1 (Arabidopsis thaliana), BnKCS (Brassica napus), CaKCS (Crambe abyssinica), LaKCS (Lunaria annua), ScFAE (Simmondsia chinensis), TmKCS (Tropaeolum majus), in combination with overexpression of S. cerevisiae derived desaturase OLE1 in the strain background CEN.PK 113-5D Δelo3 ACC1**.

We showed the formation of very long chain fatty acids in strains of S. cerevisiae by heterologous expression of different combinations of an elongases (KCS) and overexpression of S. cerevisiae derived desaturase OLE1. When comparing to the particular control strains (CEN.PK 113-11C, CEN.PK 113-5D Δelo3 ACC1**), it becomes clear that the levels of very long chain fatty acids of C20:0, C20:1, C22:0, C22:1, C24:0, C24:1 become detectable and are substantially increased (FIG. 17).

**Production of Docosanol by At5FAR**

The FAR tested in this study include those from FAR1 from Arabidopsis thaliana (codon optimized for yeast: SEQ ID NO: 42)

The codon-optimized sequences for the genes At5FAR were obtained from GenScript (860 Centennial Ave., Piscataway, N.J. 08854, U.S.), containing the Kozak sequence AAAAAA directly in front of the start codon ATG, containing 30 bp overhang on each side for subcloning via Gibson cloning with primers (SEQ ID NO: 179-SEQ ID NO: 180) between the TEF1 promoter and CYC1 terminator into pSPGM2-ELO2 creating pSPGM2:At5FAR:ELO2. The plasmid pSPGM2:At5FAR:ELO2 was transformed into the following yeast strains: JV03 Δelo3 strain. Yeast strains were transformed and analyzed by GC-MS using the same conditions as described in Example 1. Docosanol production in one independent clone of a control strain (JV03 Δelo3 pELO2) and producing strains (JV03 Δelo3 pELO2 pAt5FAR) are shown in FIG. 14. Here we show the successful production of Docosanol in yeast strain JV03 Δelo3 pELO2 pAt5FAR up to 1.2 mg/L titer.

**High Level Production of Docosanol**

Overexpression of ACC1** was performed by integration into the chromosome to replace the gene gal1 in yeast using primers (SEQ ID NO: 204-205) in the IMX581 strain to generate the strain IMX581 pACC1**. This was done by using the CRISPR/Cas9 system as described in (Jakocitinas et al., 2015).

The pathways for high level production of docosanol were assembled in the yeast chromosome using a modular pathway engineering strategy as previously described (Zhou et al., 2012). The whole pathway was divided into three modules of DS1, 2. In more detail, the DS1 module of ELO3(up)+(TDH2t-ELO1-GAL7p)+CYC1t+ELO2 was assembled by fusing the DNA parts of ELO3-up, TDH2t, ELO1, GAL7p, CYC1t and ELO2. The upstream homologous arms ELO3-up (from position −382 to +3) was amplified from CEN.PK113-11C genomic DNA with primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 184-SEQ ID NO: 185). The TDH2t was amplified from yeast genome DNA by using primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 186-SEQ ID NO: 187). The ELO1 was amplified from yeast genome DNA by using primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 188-SEQ ID NO: 189). The GAL7p was amplified from yeast genome DNA by using primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 190-SEQ ID NO: 191). The CYC1t was amplified from yeast genome DNA by using primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 192-SEQ ID NO: 193). The ELO2 was amplified from yeast genome DNA by using primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 194-SEQ ID NO: 195). The DS2 module of ELO2+GAL10p-GAL1p+At5FAR+FBA1+ELO3dw was assembled by fusing the DNA parts of ELO2, GAL10p-GAL1p, At5FAR, FBA1 and ELO3dw. The ELO2 was amplified from yeast genome DNA by using primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 204-SEQ ID NO: 205). The GAL10p-GAL p was amplified from yeast genome DNA by using primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 196-SEQ ID NO: 197). The At5FAR was amplified from plasmid pSPGM2-At5FAR by using primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 198-SEQ ID NO: 199). The FBA1t was amplified from yeast genome DNA by using primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 200-SEQ ID NO: 201). The ELO3dw was amplified from yeast genome DNA by using primer pair (SEQ ID NO: 202-SEQ ID NO: 203). The double break (DSB) was created by plasmid pROS10-Elo3 using primer (SEQ ID NO: 183).

The pathways for high level docosanol production were integrated into strain IMX581 pACC1** strain to get strain IMX581 pACC1**pELO1pELO2pAt5FAR.

All pathways as described above were integrated according to the genetic arrangement shown in FIG. 15.

Production titers of the control strain (JV03 Δelo3 pELO2 pAt5FAR) and the producing strain (IMX581 pACC1**pELO1pELO2pAt5FAR) are shown in FIG. 16. Through the described strategy we accomplished high level production of Docosanol up to 45 mg/L.

**Production of Wax Esters by Combining Reductase, Wax Ester Synthase and Elongase**

Next, the intrinsic elo2 gene was tested in combination with the reductase/wax ester synthases described in Example 1. For this, the genes were amplified with primers introducing a kozak sequence in front of the ATG start codon and different overhangs at the 5′ and 3′ end of each gene which are compatible with a constitutively active promoter and terminator, respectively (SEQ ID NO: 127-SEQ ID NO: 144). The genes were assembled with the pYX212 plasmid backbone like described previously. The resulting plasmids were: pYX212::AmFAR::Elo2, pYX212: MaFAldhR::Elo2, pYX212::SciFAR::Elo2, pYX212::TaFAR::Elo2, pYX212::AmFAR::AbWS::Elo2, pYX212::AmFAR::AtWS::Elo2, pYX212::AmFAR::EgWS::Elo2, pYX212::AmFAR::SciWS::Elo2, pYX212::MaFAldhR::AbWS::Elo2, pYX212::MaFAldhR::AtWS::Elo2, pYX212::MaFAldhR::EgWS::Elo2, pYX212::MaFAldhR::SciWS::Elo2, pYX212::SciFAR::AbWS::Elo2, pYX212::SciFAR::AtWS::Elo2, pYX212::SciFAR::EgWS::Elo2, pYX212::SciFAR::SciWS::Elo2, pYX212::TaFAR::AbWS::Elo2, pYX212::TaFAR::AtWS::Elo2, pYX212::TaFAR::EgWS::Elo2, pYX212::TaFAR::SciWS::Elo2 (Plasmid ID 38-61).

The plasmids were transformed into CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ ACC1**. Yeast competent cells were prepared and transformed with 1 μg of plasmid DNA according to the lithium acetate/single-stranded carrier DNA/polyethylene glycol method (Gietz and Woods, 2002).

Three independent clones were isolated for each of the producer and control strains by streak purification onto fresh SD-Ura 2% glucose plates. Each clone was grown in precultures of 5 mL glucose minimal medium (Verduyn et al., 1992) for 2 days, inoculated to fresh glucose minimal medium at an OD600 of 0.05-0.1 in 25 ml in 250 ml shake flasks. The cultures were incubated at 30° C. and 200 rpm. After 48 h, cell pellets were collected by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 1000 rcf and washed twice with 5 ml phosphate buffer (10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.5).

To analyze the fatty acid spectrum in strains expressing different KCS genes or a KCS gene in combination with a desaturase, fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) were prepared and analyzed according to Khoomrung et al., 2012. Production data of these strains compared to particular control strains (CEN.PK 113-11C and CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ ACC1** pYX212) are shown in FIG. 17.

To analyze the fatty alcohol and wax ester spectrum, extraction of lipids was carried out as previously described with the exception that the final sample was dissolved in hexane (instead of chloroform/methanol) and that heptadecanyl heptadecanoate (wax esters) and heptadecanol (fatty alcohols) were used as internal standards (Khoomrung et al., 2013). Subsequently, 2 μl injections were analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (Focus GC ISQ™ single quadrupole GC; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a ZB-50 column (L=30 m, ID 0.32 mm, df=0.5 μm) (Phenomenex®, Værløse, Denmark). The inlet temperature was set to 375° C., the helium (carrier) gas flow to 1 ml/min splitless. The initial oven temperature was set to 150° C. and held for 10 minutes. Then the temperature was ramped to 350° C. by 7.5° C./min and hold for 10 min. The mass transfer line temperature was set to 250° C., the ion source temperature was set to 250° C. and a full scan for m/z of 50 to 650 was performed. The analytical standards for alcohols and wax esters were purchased from Nu-Check Prep, Inc. (Nu-Check Prep, Inc., Elysian, Minn., USA) with an exact weight amount. They were dissolved in hexane and analyzed using the same protocol and column like for the samples.

Exemplary gas chromatogram spectra of one independent clone of a control strain (CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ ACC1** pYX212) and 7 producing strains are shown in FIG. 7, while FIG. 8. FIG. 9, FIG. 10 and FIG. 11 depict the fatty acid, fatty alcohol and wax ester production spectrum in the producing strains, respectively. FIGS. 12 and 13 show the specific m/z peaks of C40 and C42 wax esters detected in the producing strain CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ ACC1** (pYX212: MaFAldhR::SciWS::Elo2) and Table 1 lists all wax ester species which could be detected in this strain.

We showed the formation of very long chain fatty alcohols and very long chain wax esters in in strains of S. cerevisiae by heterologous expression of different combinations of an elongase, reductases and wax ester synthases. When comparing to the particular control strains (CEN.PK 113-5D Δelo3 ACC1**), it becomes clear that long chain and very long chain fatty alcohols of C16, C18, C20, C22 and very long chain wax ester of C30, C32, C34, C36, C38, C40, C42 become detectable and are substantially increased (FIG. 9, FIG. 10, FIG. 11).

**Example 3**

Enhancement of Monounsaturated Fatty Acid Synthesis by Overexpression of Various Δ9-Desaturases in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

In this example desaturases are overexpressed to increase the production of monounsaturated fatty acids in S. cerevisiae. The intrinsic desaturase of S. cerevisiae (see Example 2) (accession number EIW10301.1) or heterologously expressed desaturase from Simmondsia chinensis (see Example 2) (accession number 1905423A) are overexpressed. The desaturase of Simmondsia chinensis is a soluble protein localized in the plastid in its natural host. The codon optimized sequence of the protein was ordered without the predicted signal peptide of the protein which included the first 30 amino acids. Beside these the desaturase ChDes9-1 from Calanus hyperboreus (SEQ ID NO: 28) accession number AHL21604.1) is tested and which has a reported substrate range of C20-C26. Yeast codon optimized versions of these genes were ordered and cloned via Gibson cloning (Gibson et al., 2009) in pSP-GM2 under constitutive active promoter and terminator control in combination with respective reductase/wax ester synthase/elongase combinations as described in Example 1 and Example 2.

In particular, the desaturase genes were tested in combination with the reductase/wax ester synthase/elongase genes as described in Example 1 and Example 2. For this, the genes were amplified with primers introducing a kozak sequence in front of the ATG start codon and different overhangs at the 5′ and 3′ end of each gene which are compatible with a constitutively active promoter and terminator, respectively. The genes were assembled with the pYX212 plasmid backbone as described in Example 2. The resulting plasmids are pYX212::Ole1 (Plasmid ID 26), pYX212::SciFAD (Plasmid ID 63) and pYX212::ChDes9-1 (Plasmid ID 64).

The yeast strains, as described in Example 2, were then transformed and analyzed using the same conditions. To analyze the fatty acid spectrum in strains expressing different desaturases or a desaturase in combination with a KCS and a reductase, fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) were prepared and analyzed according to Khoomrung et al., 2012. The analytical standards for FAME were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Sigma Aldrich, Stockholm, Sweden). They were dissolved in hexane and analyzed using the same protocol and column as the samples.

To analyze the fatty alcohol and wax ester spectrum in strains expressing different reductases in combination with a KCS, a reductase and a wax ester synthase, extraction of lipids was carried out as described in Example 2.

Exemplary data of overexpressing the intrinsic desaturase Ole1p and its effect on increasing the mono unsaturated fatty acid content is shown in FIG. 18.

We showed the formation of increased amount of unsaturated fatty acids when overexpressing OLE1 gene in S. cerevisiae. In combination with overexpression of the elongase gene ELO2 saturated long chain and very long chain fatty acid levels were shown to decrease and unsaturated fatty acid levels of C16:1, C18:1, C20:1, C22:1 increased (FIG. 18).

**Example 4**

Increase of Fatty Acyl-CoA Molecules by Overexpression of the Fatty Acyl-CoA Synthase (FAA1)

This example comprises the endogenous overexpression of the fatty acyl-CoA synthase (Faa1) from S. cerevisiae (accession number NP_014962.3), catalyzing the formation of fatty acyl-CoA based on free fatty acids. The overexpression of this gene is done by amplification from yeast genomic DNA with respective 30 bp overhangs according to Gibson cloning method followed by cloning on pSP-GM2 under strong constitutive promoter and terminator control, combined with the particular reductase/wax ester synthase/elongase combinations described in Example 1 and Example 2. Yeast strains as described in Example 1 are transformed and analyzed under the same conditions.

**Example 5**

Overexpression of Endogenous Yeast Genes YBR159, PHS1 and TSC13 to Increase VLCFA Synthesis

The yeast VLCFA elongation system consists of 4 enzymes: 3-keto acyl-CoA synthase (Elo1, Elo2, Elo3), 3-keto acyl-CoA reductase (YBR159Wp), 3-hydroxy acyl-CoA dehydratase (Phs1) and an enoyl-CoA reductase (Tsc13), see FIG. 6 (Denic and Weissman, 2007). These enzymes are overexpressed in yeast by exchanging their native promoter with a constitutively active strong TEF1 promoter. This is done by using the CRISPR/Cas9 system as previously described (Jakocitinas et al., 2015).

**Example 6**

Enhancing VLCFA Synthesis by Coexpressing Plant Derived Elongase Systems

As described in Example 2 elongase enzymes from plants like Simmondsia chinensis (accession number AAC49186.1) or the FAE1 from Arabidopsis thaliana (accession number AAA70154.1) are overexpressed in S. cerevisiae. To improve the elongation cycle for these plant derived enzymes the particular plant derived reductases and dehydrates are co-expressed in S. cerevisiae. Here it is exemplified for Arabidopsis thaliana genes CER10 (reductase1, Tsc13 ortholog), KCR1 (reductase2, YBR159Wp ortholog), PAS2 (dyhydratase, P1 ortholog) which were codon-optimized for yeast expression and integrated into the genome under constitutively active promoter and terminator control as described elsewhere (Jensen et al., 2014).

**Example 7**

Expressing Arabidopsis thaliana Genes LACS1, LACS2 and LACS3 in Yeast to Improve VLCFA Activation to CoA Form

The genetic sequences coding for the long-chain acyl-CoA synthetases LACS1, LACS2 and LACS3 derived from Arabidopsis thaliana are codon optimized and heterologously expressed in yeast (Pulsifer et al., 2012). These facilitate an activation of long chain fatty acids with CoA which is important for follow up reactions catalyzed by reductases and wax ester synthases. Yeast codon optimized versions of these genes were ordered and cloned via Gibson cloning in pSP-GM2 under constitutive active promoter and terminator control in combination with respective reductase/wax ester synthase/elongase combinations and tested in particular strains as described in Example 1 and Example 2.

**Example 8**

Enhancement of VLCFA Synthesis by Evolving the Endogenous Yeast Fatty Acid Synthase

For this screening system an appropriate plasmid system is constructed. It is based on the vector backbone of p413TEF (Mumberg et al., 1995) carrying a combination of TEF1 promoter and CYC1 terminator. PKEX2 is amplified from the genome with 30 bp overhang and is cloned via Gibson cloning into p413TEF replacing the TEF1 promoter and creating p413KEX2.

For library generation the FAS1 or FAS2 gene from S. cerevisiae is mutated by methods of error prone PCR through amplification from S. cerevisiae genomic DNA. The primers include 30 bp overhangs respective to the plasmid backbone of p413KEX2 facilitating cloning in between PKEX2 and TCYC1. The amplified gene library is cloned via Gibson cloning into p413KEX2 creating the libraries lib-Fas1-p413KEX2 or lib-Fas2-p413KEX2 respectively.

An appropriate strain for screening the functionality of the mutated FAS1/FAS2 for VLCFA production is created by gene knockout of ELO2, ELO3 in the yeast genome as described elsewhere (Paul et al., 2006). The method is applied on the strain CEN.PK113-11C (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 his3Δ1 ura 3-52). A plasmid, which carries the wildtype ELO3 gene under TEF1 promoter control is constructed (p416TEF-ELO3). This is done by Gibson cloning, amplifying the ELO3 gene from yeast genomic DNA with 30 bp overhang primers for cloning it in between the TEF1 promoter and CYC1 terminator located on p416TEF (Mumberg et al., 1995). This plasmid is used to complement the otherwise lethal phenotype of CEN.PK113-11C, Elo2Δ, Elo3A as described elsewhere (Paul et al., 2006). The library lib-Fas1-p413KEX2 or lib-Fas2-p413KEX2 is transformed into this strain for HIS+prototrophic transformants are selected. These transformants are screened for growth on 5-fluoro-orotic acid (FOA) for negative selection for plasmid loss of p416TEF-ELO3. Only cells carrying a functional FAS system, which is capable of producing VLCFA, compensate for the loss of the elongase system and show growth under these conditions. The screening is done at different temperatures (26° C., 30° C., 33° C., 37° C.) as different cellular needs for VLCFA with different chain length are expected.

The same approach is used on a small library where the linker region between MPT and ACP domain in the Fas2 protein of S. cerevisiae is specifically varied. This is done e.g., by error prone PCR or changing linker length in the genome using the CRISPR/Cas9 system as described elsewhere (Jakočiūnas et al., 2015).

Final candidates are subcloned via Gibson cloning into pSP-GM2::AmFAR under TEF1 promoter control and tested in strains JV03 (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 ura3-52 are1Δ dga1Δ are2Δ lro1Δ pox1A) and PWY12 (fas1Δ::HIS3fas2Δ::LEU2) (Wenz et al., 2001).

**Example 9**

Enhancement of VLCFA Synthesis by Heterologous Expression of Fatty Acid Synthases Derived from Mycobacteria

Fatty acid synthase gene sequences derived from bacterial hosts like Mycobacterium vaccae, Mycobacterium diernhoferi 41002, Mycobacterium neoaurum and Mycobacterium parafortuitum PA-1, Mycobacterium intracellulare were codon optimized for expression in S. cerevisiae. For example, the codon-optimized sequences for the gene 3-oxoacyl-ACP synthase [Mycobacterium vaccae] (WP_003928293) (SEQ ID NO: 39), was obtained from GenScript (860 Centennial Ave., Piscataway, N.J. 08854, U.S.), containing 30 bp overhang on each side for subcloning via Gibson cloning between the TEF1 promoter and CYC1 terminator into pSP-GM2 and pSP-GM2::AmFAR (Example 1) creating pSP-GM2::MvFas and pSP-GM2::AmFAR::MvFas. Besides, a gene coding for an acyl-carrier protein synthase (AcpS) derived from Mycobacterium vaccae (WP_040539704.1) was codon optimized for expression in S. cerevisiae, obtained from GenScript and subcloned with previously amplified pTDH3 promoter and tFBA1 terminator sequence via Gibson clone assembly into pSP-GM2::MvFas and pSP-GM2::AmFAR::MvFas. Each plasmid was transformed into the following yeast strains: CEN.PK 113-5D (MATaMAL2-8c SUC2 ura3-52), JV03 (MATaMAL2-8c SUC2 ura3-52 are1Δ dga1Δ are2A lro1Δ pox1A) and PWY12 (fas1Δ::HIS3 fas2Δ::LEU2) (Wenz et al., 2001). These plasmids are also transformed into a yeast strain having the FAS1 gene under the control of the PHXT1 promoter (CEN.PK 113-5D, PHXT1-FAS1). It exhibits a reduced expression of the yeast FAS1 gene under glucose limiting conditions. In this strain, the functionality and selectivity for the production of VLCFA with bacterial FAS systems is tested under glucose limiting conditions, to avoid the competition for Malonyl-CoA supply with the endogenous yeast FAS system. Fatty acid profiles and fatty alcohol profiles are determined as described in Example 1.

In parallel the codon-optimized sequences for the gene 3-oxoacyl-ACP synthase [Mycobacterium vaccae] (WP_003928293) (SEQ ID NO: 39) containing 30 bp overhang on each side were subcloned via Gibson cloning between the GPD1 promoter and CYC1 terminator into p415GPD (SEQ ID NO: 41) creating p415GPD::MvFas using primers SEQ ID NO: 173-SEQ ID NO: 178. Besides, a gene coding for an acyl-carrier protein synthase (AcpS) derived from Mycobacterium vaccae (WP_040539704.1) (SEQ ID NO: 40) was codon optimized for expression in S. cerevisiae, obtained from GenScript and subcloned with previously amplified pTDH3 promoter and tFBA1 terminator sequence (SEQ ID NO: 179-SEQ ID NO: 182) via Gibson clone assembly into p415GPD:MvFas to generate p415 GPD:MvFas::Acps.

The Gibson assembly method (Gibson et al., 2009) was used to construct the plasmids p415GPD:MvFas; p415GPD:MvFas::Acps and pSPGM2::At5FAR.

All plasmids were transformed into Escherichia coli DH5a by chemical transformation.

The colonies carrying the desired plasmids were verified by colony PCR.

After isolation of the plasmids and verification of each gene by sequencing (Eurofins Genomics, Ebersberg, Germany). The plasmid p415GPD::MvFas::Acps was transformed into the following yeast strain TDY7005 (Mata lys2 ura3-52 trp1 Δ leu2 Δ elo2::KAN elo3::TRP1/pRS316-ELO3) (Paul et al., 2006) (Example 8) and LEU2 prototrophic transformants were selected. The transformants were screened for growth on FOA and correct clones were confirmed by sequence analysis.

Eight independent clones were isolated and each clone was grown in precultures of 5 mL in SD-leu+2% glucose medium for 2 days, inoculated to fresh SD-leu+2% glucose medium at an OD600 of 0.05-0.1 in 25 ml in 250 ml shake flasks. Extraction of lipids was carried out as described before with the exception that the final sample was dissolved in hexane (instead of chloroform/methanol) (Khoomrung et al., 2013). Subsequently, 2 μl injections were analyzed using a gas chromatograph (Focus GC, ThermoScientific) mass spectrometer (DSQII ThermoScientific) equipped with a ZB-5MS Guardian (L=30 m, ID 0.25 mm, df=0.25 μm, Phenomenex) column. The inlet temperature was set to 280° C., the helium (carrier) gas flow to 1 ml/min splitless. The GC program for FAME quantification was as follows: initial temperature of 45° C. hold for 2.5 min; then ramp to 220° C. at a rate of 20° C. per min and hold for 2 min; ramp to 300° C. at a rate of 20° C. per min and hold for 5 min. The temperature of the inlet and detector were kept at 280° C. and 300° C., respectively.

Gas chromatogram spectra and quantitative data of one independent clone of a control strain (TDY7005) and producing strains (YT01) are shown in FIGS. 19 and 20.

In this example we prove the functional expression of a FAS system derived from Mycobacteria in the yeast S. cerevisiae enabling for the specific and high level production of C22 fatty acids up to 3 ug/mg CDW.

**Example 10**

Enhancement of VLCFA Synthesis by Evolving Yeast Fatty Acid Synthase Through Creation of Chimeric Enzymes (Yeast Origin and Mycobacteria Origin)

Based on the codon optimized gene sequences of bacterial FAS systems derived from mycobacteria as described in Example 9 parts from these are fused to yeast derived FAS1/FAS2 sequences according to the method of DNA shuffling described elsewhere (Crameri et al., 1998). The vector and screening systems used are same to the approach described in Example 8. A library is created through subcloning of chimeras using Gibson cloning into p413KEX2. After the screening, as performed in Example 8, the final candidates are subcloned via Gibson cloning into pSP-GM2::AmFAR under TEF1 promoter control and tested in strains JV03 (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 ura3-52 are1Δ dga1Δ are2A lro1Δ pox1A) and PWY12 (fas1Δ::HIS3 fas2Δ::LEU2).

**Example 11**

Production of Long Chain Fatty Alcohols and Wax Esters in Yarrowia lipolytica

Expression of recombinant genes in accordance with the present invention in Yarrowia lipolytica can be accomplished by modification of relevant genetic engineering methods, as discussed herein. Yarrowia lipolytica strain PO1f (MATA ura3-302 leu2-270 xpr2-322 axp2-deltaNU49 XPR2::SUC2), a leucine and uracil auxotroph obtained from ATCC (ATCC MYA-2613) is used as a background strain. Genes to be expressed in the strain can be assembled and integrated as previously described (Gao et al., 2014). This method involves the amplification of the genes to be expressed, promoters, terminators, markers, and integration sites. The fragments are then assembled using overlap extension PCR (OE-PCR) into the individual gene expression cassettes and the DNA is then transformed into yeast strains using the Zymogen Frozen EZ yeast transformation kit II (Zymo Research Corporation) as previously reported (Blazeck et al., 2011). Strains are selected on the appropriate dropout media (SD-ura, SD-leu, or SD-ura-leu).

For example, to integrate an elongase (KCS from Simmondsia chinesis, accession number: AAC49186.1; codon-optimized for yeast; see Example 2) and reductase (FAR from Apis mellifera; accession number: ADJ56408; codon-optimized for yeast; see Example 1) into Y. lipolytica, the integration sites (LEU2 locus) promoters (EXP1p and TEF1p), terminators (lip2t and xpr2t), genes (ELO and FAR) and marker gene (URA3) are amplified using primers AKp1-18. The fragments are assembled by OE-PCR into an expression cassettes and transformed into strain PO1f as described above, resulting in strain Y1AK1 (ELO FAR URA3 leu2), capable of producing long-chain alcohols. To create a strain capable of producing wax esters, the gene AtWS (wax ester synthase from Arabidopsis thaliana; accession number NP_568547; codon-optimized for yeast) is introduced into strain YIAK1. This is done by amplifying the GPDp promoter, lipltterminator, WES, integration site (URA3 locus) and LEU2 using primers AKp19-30. The resulting fragments are assembled into expression cassettes and transformed into strain YIAK1 to yield strain Y1AK2 (ELO FAR WES URA3 LEU2).

Alternatively, multi-copy integration can be achieved by targeting the genes into rDNA loci as described elsewhere (Gao et al., 2014).

Expression of recombinant genes in accordance with the present invention in Yarrowia lipolytica can be accomplished by modification of relevant genetic engineering methods, as discussed herein. In a parallel approach Y. lipolytica strain JMY195 (Pol1d MATa, ura3-302, leu2-270, xpr2-322) (Ledall et al., 1994), a leucine and uracil auxotroph, obtained from BIMLip (INRA, UMR1319, MICALIS, Domaine de Vilvert, F-78352 Jouy-en-Josas, France), was used as a background strain. The heterologous genes, coding for various FARs and WSs, which were described in Examples 1 and 2 were synthesized with a codon composition optimized for Y. lipolytica (SEQ ID NO: 29-SEQ ID NO: 36). The genes YALI0B20196g (AS 54% identity, 90% query cover to Elo2 of S. cerevisiae) (SEQ ID NO: 29) and YALI0C05951p (SEQ ID NO: 30), annotated as a Δ9-desaturase, were amplified with specific, uracil containing primers (SEQ ID NO: 145-SEQ ID NO: 148) based on g-DNA from the Y. lipolytica wildtype strain W29 (ATCC® 20460™) (Tharaud et al., 1992). The promoters pTEF, pEXP, pGPAT, pGPD, pPOX2 and pPOT1 as well as the terminator XPR2t were also amplified based on Y. lipolytica wildtype g-DNA, using specific primers containing uracil (SEQ ID NO: 149-SEQ ID NO: 150).

Based on the two plasmids JMP62::pTEF::URAex (Plasmid ID 65) and JMP62::pTEF::LEUex (Plasmid ID 66) (Beopoulos et al., 2014), two new plasmids were constructed by circular polymerase extension cloning (CPEC) (Quan et al., 2009; Quan et al., 2011) under use of specific primers (SEQ ID NO: 149-SEQ ID NO: 156), resulting in the plasmids JMP62::URAex(USER) (Plasmid ID 67) and JMP62::LEUex (USER) (Plasmid ID 68). Those plasmids contain a USER site to make them available for USER cloning (Jensen et al., 2014).

The genes coding for various FARs and WSs which were described in Examples 1 and 2 were synthesized with a codon composition optimized for Y. lipolytica (SEQ ID NO: 31-SEQ ID NO: 38) and amplified with specific, uracil containing primers (SEQ ID NO: 157-SEQ ID NO: 172).

The plasmids JMP62::URAex(USER) and JMP62::LEUex(USER) were cut with the enzymes Nb.BsmI and AsiSI. The genes of interest were treated with the USER enzyme mix (NEB) before cloning into the cut plasmid backbones. The resulting plasmids were: JMP62::URAex::AmFAR, JMP62::URA3ex::MaFAldhR, JMP62::URA3ex::SciFAR, JMP62::URAex::TaFAR, JMP62::URAex::AmFAR::AbWS, JMP62::URAex::AmFAR::AtWS JMP62::URAex::AmFAR::EgWS, JMP62::URAex::AmFAR::SciWS, JMP62::URAex::MaFAldhR::AbWS, JMP62::URAex::MaFAldhR::AtWS, JMP62::URAex::MaFAldhR::EgWS, JMP62::URAex::MaFAldhR::SciWS, JMP62::URAex::SciFAR::AbWS, JMP62::URAex::SciFAR::AtWS, JMP62::URAex::SciFAR::EgWS, JMP62::URAex::SciFAR::SciWS, JMP62::URAex::TaFAR::AbWS, JMP62::URAex::TaFAR::AtWS, JMP62::URAex::SciFAR::EgWS, JMP62::URAex::TaFAR::SciWS, JMP62::LEUex::YlElo2 JMP62::LEUex::YlOle1 and JMP62::LEUex::YlOle1::YlElo2 (Plasmid ID 69-91).

All USER plasmids were digested with NotI, gel purified and transformed into Y. lipolytica JMY195 by chemical transformation, using the one-step transformation protocol by Chen et al., 1997.

Three independent clones were isolated for each of the producer and control strains by streak purification onto fresh SD-Ura/SD-Leu/SD-URA-LEU 2% glucose plates. Each clone was grown in precultures of 5 mL glucose minimal medium (with added Uracil or Leucin where necessary) (Verduyn et al., 1992) for 2 days, inoculated to fresh glucose minimal medium (with added Uracil or Leucin where necessary) at an OD600 of 0.05-0.1 in 25 ml in 250 ml shake flasks. The cultures were incubated at 30° C. and 200 rpm. After 48 h, cell pellets were collected by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 1000 rcf and washed twice with 5 ml phosphate buffer (10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.5).

To analyze the fatty acid spectrum in strains having integrated the JMP62::LEUex::YlElo2, JMP62::LEUex::YlOle1 or JMP62::LEUex::YlOle1::YlElo2 fragment, fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) were prepared and analyzed according to Khoomrung et al., 2012.

The analysis of the fatty alcohols and wax esters in the remaining strains, which have integrated one of the linearized plasmids with the ID 69-88, was carried out as described in Example 2.

Exemplary gas chromatogram spectra of one independent clone of a control strain (JMY195 JMP62::URAex(USER)) and producing strain JMY195 JMP1047USER::AmFAR::SciWS are shown in FIG. 25.

**Example 12**

Production of Long Chain Fatty Alcohols in Yarrowia lipolytica Combined with Gene Deletion

Flux towards the products of interest can be increased by removing P3-oxidation capacity, which can be accomplished by deletion of the gene MFE1. In addition, deletion of the PEX10 gene, which is involved in peroxisomal biogenesis, was done. Therefore, deletion of these genes is combined with the above modifications. To create a strain deleted in PEX10, the ELO-FAR cassettes are targeted to the PEX10 locus instead of the LEU2 locus. These constructs are transformed into strain PO1f, resulting in strain Y1AK3 (Δpex10 ELO FAR URA3 leu2).

Alternatively, to create a strain containing a deletion in the MFE1 gene, the ELO-FAR cassettes are targeted to the MFE0 locus instead of the LEU2 locus. These constructs are transformed into strain PO1f resulting in strain Y1AK4 (Δmfe1 ELO FAR URA3 leu2).

To obtain a strain containing deletion in both genes LEU2 is targeted into the MFE1 locus of strain Y1AK3, resulting in strain Y1AK5 (Δpex10 Δmfe1 ELO FAR URA3 LEU2).

To obtain a wax-ester-producing strain with one of the above deletions, WES is amplified and fused into a LEU2-based expression cassette as described above and targeted to the URA3 locus of strain Y1AK3 or Y1AK4, resulting in strains Y1AK6 (Δpex10 ELO FAR WES URA3 LEU2) and Y1AK7 (Δmfe1 ELO FAR WES URA3 LEU2), respectively. To obtain a wax-ester-producing strain with both deletions, WES is amplified and fused into a LEU2-based expression cassette as described above, and targeted to the MFE1 locus of strain Y1AK3, resulting in strain Y1AK8 (Δpex10 Δmfe1 ELO FAR WES URA3 LEU2).

Flux towards the products of interest can be increased by deletion of genes which consume fatty acids, the precursors for fatty acyl-CoA and fatty alcohol synthesis. Examples of those genes are lro1, dga1 and dga2 whose gene products are responsible for triacylglycerol (TAG) formation in Y. lipolytica. The genes pox1-6 are encoding enzymes which are involved in the 3-oxidation of fatty acids, thereby reducing the level of free fatty acids. In addition, Y. lipolytica possesses an enzyme able to produce diunsaturated fatty acids. Since our products of interest are derived from monounsatured fatty acids, the gene fad2, encoding the Δ-12 desaturase in this organism, is also a target of deletion.

A strain carrying deletions in the before mentioned genes, JMY2159 (Po1d MATA ura3-302 leu2-270 xpr2-322 pox1-6Δdga1Δlro1Δdga2Δfad2Δ) (Beopoulos et al., 2014) was transformed with the plasmids described in Example 11.

To analyze the fatty acid spectrum in strains having integrated the JMP62::LEUex::YlElo2, JMP62::LEUex::YlOle1 or JMP62::LEUex::YlOle1::YlElo2 fragment, fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) were prepared and analyzed according to Khoomrung et al., 2012. The analysis of the fatty alcohols and wax esters in the remaining strains, which have integrated one of the linearized plasmids with the ID 69-88, was carried out as described in Example 2.

**Example 13**

Production of Erucic Acid in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

This example demonstrates the production of increased levels of erucic acid (C22:1ω9) in S. cerevisiae. Erucic acid is derived from elongation of oleic acid (C18:1). To increase the level of oleic acid, mutations S659A and S1157A (Shi et al., 2014) are introduced into the ACC1 gene using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. In addition, OLE1 encoding fatty acid desaturase was overexpressed. Alternatively, ChDes9-2 was codon-optimised for S. cerevisiae and inserted into the yeast genome to replace OLE1 using the CRISPR/Cas system. This is combined with expression of a plant FAE1-like 3-ketoacyl-CoA synthase (KAS) from Simmondsia chinensis (accession number AAC49186.1), Arabidopsis thaliana (AAA70154.1), Crambe abyssinica (AY793549) or Brassica napus (AF490459). OLE1 and the respective KAS gene (codon optimized for expression in yeast) are cloned into plasmid pSP-GM2 using Gibson cloning. All listed modifications were implemented in strain CEN.PK 113-5D (ura3-52), JV03 (ura3-52 are1Δ dga1Δ are2A lro1A pox1A), CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ, and JV03 elo3Δ.

This example demonstrates the production of increased levels of erucic acid (C22:1ω9) in S. cerevisiae. Erucic acid is derived from elongation of oleic acid (C18:1). In particular the gene coding for the double mutated ACC1p ** of S. cerevisiae was integrated into the genome of S. cerevisiae like described in Example 2.

In addition, OLE1, encoding the S. cerevisiae fatty acid desaturase, was overexpressed as described in Examples 2 and 3. Alternatively, the heterologous desaturases ChDes9-1 or SciFAD which are described in Examples 2 and 3 were overexpressed in S. cerevisiae to increase the amount of very-long chain, monounsaturated fatty acids.

The expression of a desaturase is combined with the expression of a plant 3-ketoacyl-CoA synthase (KCS) from Simmondsia chinensis, Arabidopsis thaliana, Crambe abyssinica or Brassica napus which are reported to mainly synthesize erucic acid. The construction of the plasmids harboring those genes was performed like described in Examples 2 and 3.

The plasmids were transformed into the strains CEN.PK 113-5D (ura3-52), JV03 (ura3-52 are1Δ dga1Δ are2Δ lro1Δ pox1A), CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ, CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ ACC1** and JV03 elo3Δ ACC1**.

Three independent clones were isolated for each of the producer and control strains by streak purification onto fresh SD-Ura 2% glucose plates. Each clone was grown in precultures of 5 mL glucose minimal medium (Verduyn et al., 1992) for 2 days, inoculated to fresh glucose minimal medium at an OD600 of 0.05-0.1 in 25 ml in 250 ml shake flasks. The cultures were incubated at 30° C. and 200 rpm. After 48 h, cell pellets were collected by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 1000 rcf and washed twice with 5 ml phosphate buffer (10 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.5).

To analyze the fatty acid spectrum in strains expressing a KCS gene in combination with a desaturase, fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) were prepared and analyzed according to Khoomrung et al., 2012. The analytical standards for FAME were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Sigma Aldrich, Stockholm, Sweden). They were dissolved in hexane and analyzed using the same protocol and column like for the samples.

Exemplary production data of one independent clone of a control strain (CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ ACC1* pYX212) and producing strains are shown in FIG. 21.

Through heterologous expression of KCS elongases in combination with OLE1 overexpression in the particular background strain of CEN.PK 113-5D elo3Δ ACC1* pYX212 we enable yeast for the production of C22:1, erucic acid up to 0.7 ug/mg CDW.

**Example 14**

Enhancement of Wax Ester Production Through Co-Expression of Specific Transporter Proteins

In order to increase the secretion of fatty acid derived products, the promoter of the FAT1 gene encoding a fatty acid transporter is exchanged for the strong constitutive TEF1 promoter using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. To increase the export of wax esters, codon optimized genes encoding A. thaliana ABC transporters ABCG11 and ABCG12 are cloned into expression vector pIYC04 (Krivoruchko et al., 2013) under control of the TEF1 and PGK1 promoter, respectively, using Gibson cloning leading to formation of plasmid pTRANS1. Subsequently, codon optimized genes encoding A. thaliana lipid transfer proteins LTPG1 and LTPG2 are cloned into pIYC04 in the same way yielding pTRANS2. The LPTG1/LPTG2 expression cassette is then integrated into pTRANS1 to generate pTRANS3. A wax ester and a fatty alcohol producing strain (see Examples 1, 2 and 15) are transformed with plasmids pTRANS1, 2, and 3, respectively, cultivated in shake flasks and intracellular as well as extracellular metabolites are determined.

**Example 15**

Enhancement of Saturated Fatty Acid Synthesis by Downregulation of Desaturase OLE1 Gene Expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

To produce saturated very long chain fatty acids (>C22:0) the endogenous desaturase gene OLE1 from S. cerevisiae was downregulated. This is either done by exchanging the natural promoter with a weak yeast promoter like PKEX2 or with a glucose concentration dependent promoter like PHXT1 using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. These modifications were implemented in strain CEN.PK 113-5D (ura3-52), JV03 (ura3-52 are1Δ dga1Δ are2Δ lro1Δ pox1A), CEN.PK 113-5D Elo3A, and JV03 Elo3Δ and CEN.PK 113-5D Elo3Δ::TEF-ELO2, JV03 Elo3Δ::TEF-ELO02, respectively.

**Example 16**

Very Long Chain Fatty Alcohol Production Derived from Fatty Acyl-CoA Through Free Fatty Acid and Fatty Aldehyde Pathway

To evaluate very long chain fatty alcohol production from fatty acyl-CoA through free fatty acids and fatty aldehyde pathway in S. cerevisiae (FIG. 22). The following pathways were constructed in S. cerevisiae YJZ01 (MATa MAL2-8c SUC2 his3Δ1 ura3-52 hfd1Δ) (Buijs et al., 2015). A FAR from Marinobacter aquaeolei (Willis et al., 2011) was expressed for fatty alcohol production from fatty acyl-CoA. A fatty acid reductase MmCAR from Mycobacterium marinum (Akhtar et al., 2013) and the corresponding co-factor phosphopantetheinyl transferase NpgA from Aspergillus nidulans were expressed (Mootz et al., 2002) for synthesis of fatty aldehyde, which is then transformed to a fatty alcohol by endogenous aldehyde reductase(s) (Buijs et al., 2015) or by a heterologous long-chain fatty aldehyde reductase from Marinobacter aquaeolei (Wahlen et al., 2009) or by any other FAR enzyme as described in Example 1.

The FACoAR encoding gene MaFACoAR, fatty acid reductase encoding gene MmCAR were codon-optimized for yeast from GenScript (Piscataway, N.J., USA). Combinations of these genes were introduced into pYX212 using a modular pathway engineering strategy as previously described (Zhou et al., 2012) resulting in the plasmid pYX212-FaCoAR and pAOHO. After purification of the plasmid, verification by restriction analysis, and sequencing, the plasmids were transformed into hfdlA strain Saccharomyces cerevisiae YJZ01 (Buijs et al., 2015).

This approach was also applied on strains producing very long chain fatty acids as mentioned in Example 2 (CEN.PK 113-5D Elo3A, and JV03 Elo3A, CEN.PK 113-5D Elo3Δ::TEF-ELO2, JV03 Elo3Δ::TEF-ELO02). The strains were analyzed and fatty alcohol profiles were measured as previously described (Buijs et al., 2015). The fatty alcohol production via the pathway through MmCAR from Mycobacterium marinum was 6-fold higher when compared to expressing the pathway via FAR from Marinobacter aquaeolei (see FIGS. 22 and 23).

**Example 17**

Overexpression of Endogenous Yeast Genes to Increase Precursor Supply for VLCFA Synthesis

Endogenous yeast genes MPP6, ACP1, EPT1, FAA1, GEP4, GGA2, IDP3, INP54, LPP1, MCR1, ORM1, RTC3, SPO7, TGL1, YFT2, FAA3 were amplified from genomic DNA of CEN.PK 113-5D with respective primers flanked by restriction sites for BamHI & SalI and cloned into the expression vector pSP-GM2 (SEQ ID NO: 1) and pSP-GM2::AmFAR. Plasmids were transformed into yeast strains CEN.PK 113-5D and JV03 and fatty acid and fatty alcohol profiles were determined as described in Buijs et al. (2015). Quantification of fatty alcohol production from this screening are shown in FIG. 24.

