# DESCRIPTION

## FIELD

The disclosure pertains to energy harvesting.

## BACKGROUND

Harvesting electrical energy from mechanical vibrations has been attracting attention of researchers from various interdisciplinary fields, because of its wide range of applicability in various fields of science and technology, including providing autonomous power supply for health monitoring of critical structures. Many materials have been studied towards for this application and piezoelectric materials have been proven to be a good option. Piezoelectric Vibration Energy Harvesters (PVEH) are being developed with the goal of achieving a wider effective band width to improve harvesting efficiency. Some use However, none of the proposed PVEHs are satisfactory, and alternative approaches are needed.

## SUMMARY

The disclosure pertains to PVEH devices that can use tuning of a resonant frequency of a novel design of PVEH at different amplitude values of input signals. In examples, the resonant frequency of the PVEH is electrically tuned using Ionic Polymer Metal Composites (IPMC). Actuation force associated with an IPMC is utilized for applying a required load on the cantilever of the energy harvester. A stacked IPMC can be used instead of a single unit. The stacked IPMC consists of two IPMCs, attached only at the ends and powered by a single supply.

Devices can comprise a cantilever and a piezoelectric transducer coupled to the cantilever to produce an electrical output signal in response to a vibration of the cantilever. An actuator is situated to variably contact the cantilever to establish a resonant frequency of the cantilever. The actuator can be one or more Ionic Polymer Metal Composite (IPMC) strips. In examples, the actuator is coupled to the cantilever to establish the resonant frequency based on a stiffness of the cantilever and an actuator driver coupled to the actuator to apply an electrical signal to the actuator to establish the resonant frequency of the cantilever. The cantilever can be a cantilever beam or a cantilever plate formed of, for example, stainless steel or aluminum. In some examples, a sensor circuit is coupled to the piezoelectric transducer to determine an electrical signal to be applied by an actuator driver to provide a predetermined output power from the piezoelectric transducer. In some examples, the sensor circuit is coupled to determine an available vibrational frequency. The actuator can be configured to adjust at least one of a cantilever stiffness or cantilever resonant frequency based on the available vibrational frequency. The cantilever can comprise a first cantilever section and a second cantilever section, wherein the first cantilever section is a base section and the second cantilever section is an extension section. The base section can be thicker than the extension section, and the base section and the extension section are secured at respective major surfaces or minor surfaces. The actuator can contact the base section or the extension section. In an example, the base section has a thickness of 0.64 mm and the extension section has a thickness of 0.37 mm, and the base section and the extension section are bonded to each other with an adhesive layer or welding at respective major surfaces. The piezoelectric transducer can be a macro fiber composite (MFC) transducer and can be bonded to a major surface of the cantilever over substantially an entire length and width of the major surface. The actuator can be situated to variably contact the cantilever in a central 80% of a cantilever length or area. A memory can store a plurality of actuator drive values and associated cantilever resonance frequencies or stiffnesses and a digital to analogy convertor coupled to the memory to apply a selected drive value to the actuator. In some examples, the actuator has a diamond shape and includes first and second actuators that are stacked.

In some examples, the actuator is a single layer ionic polymer metal fiber composite (MFCs) or a pair of such MFCs.

Methods comprise subjecting a cantilever to vibrations and contacting the cantilever at one or more locations or with one or more contact forces using an actuator. A resonant frequency of the cantilever is identified based on the vibrations for each of the one or more locations and/or each of the one or more contact force and an actuator drive value associated with the resonant frequency is stored for each of the one or more locations and/or each of the one or more contact forces. The vibrations can be applied as a series of single frequency vibrations. The resonant frequency for each of the one or more locations and/or each of the one or more contact forces can be determined based on an output of a piezoelectric transducer coupled to the cantilever.

Methods comprise subjecting a cantilever to vibrations and contacting the cantilever at one or more locations using an actuator. Based on coupling of the vibrations by the cantilever to a piezoelectric transducer, an actuator drive for one or more vibrational frequencies and associated with a selected piezoelectric transducer output power is determined.

Methods comprise contacting a cantilever using a actuator and adjusting the contact based on an output power from a transducer coupled to receive mechanical vibrations from the cantilever. In further examples, an electrical device is powered or charging an electrical storage device is charged based on a transducer output.

The foregoing and other features and advantages will become more apparent from the following detailed description, which proceeds with reference to the accompanying figures.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION

### Introduction

The disclosure pertains to piezoelectric vibration energy harvesters (PVEHs) and associated methods and devices. In typical examples, the disclosed devices are responsive at low frequencies such as less than 1 kHz, 500 Hz, 250 Hz, 100 Hz, 50 Hz, 25 Hz, 10 Hz, 5 Hz, 2.5 Hz, 1 Hz, or lower. The devices can be frequency tuned using power harvested by the devices. In examples, a representative PVEH integrates two smart materials, a piezoelectric material (such as a Macro Fiber Composite (MFC)) situated to harvest energy and an Ionic Polymer Metal Composite (IPMC) situated to provide device tuning over a wide frequency range.

MFCs consist of a piezoelectric sheet formed of piezoelectric fibers of square cross section which are bonded together. This piezoelectric sheet is placed between layers of adhesive, electrodes and a polyimide film. The electrodes are typically made in an interdigitated pattern to enable better contact with the fibers and in-plane poling/actuation. This pattern also helps in achieving low voltage drop at the interface. MFCs can be environmentally sealed and hence be non-porous. MFCs have advantages over other piezoelectric elements. MFCs are flexible and are thus suitable for PVEHs having high deflections. MFCs can be bonded to surfaces effectively and can provide energy conversion at their resonant frequencies when used in cantilever mode. However, output power drops at other vibration frequencies. In he disclosed examples, active tuning can be provided using IPMCs, which can be compact, have low mass, and required little power. IPMCs consist of a per fluorinated ion exchange membrane such as a Nafion membrane situated between two electrodes, typically metals or other conductors coated with a noble metal, gold or platinum. When subjected to low voltages (typically 1 to 4 V), positively charged hydrated cations in the Nafion membrane network are repelled by the anode and hence move to the negative electrode. The water molecules that are tagged to cations also move within the membrane. The resulting osmotic pressure gradient causes bending of IPMC strips with the direction of bending dependent on the polarity of the applied voltage. In addition to bending an IPMC, an applied voltage also increases IPMC stiffness. Both bending and stiffness changes in response to an applied voltage can be used vary a load supplied by an IPMC,

In the examples, specific configurations of cantilevers are used for purposes of illustration but other cantilever configurations can be used. Cantilevers can have one fixed end and one free end only, or other combinations such as cantilevers in multiple directions, or cantilevers supported within the cantilever span, etc.

### Example 1

Referring to FIGS. 1-1A, a PVEH device 100 includes a cantilever base 102 to which a cantilever 104 is secured. The cantilever 104 extends from the cantilever 102 and is generally thinner than the cantilever 104. An MFC 106 or other flexible piezoelectric transducer is secured to the cantilever 104. A location 110 on the cantilever 104 is designated for frequency response tuning based on loading applied to the location 110. For evaluation purposes, a location 112 is designed for the application of vibrational forces whose energy is to be harvested. In the sectional view of FIG. 1A, a tuning member 114 is coupled to a support member 116 and is situated to contact the cantilever 104 at the location 110 to tune a cantilever resonance frequency. In typical examples, the tuning member 114 includes one or more IPMCs that are coupled to electrical power source (a voltage source) such as an energy storage device to which the PVEH 100 delivers energy. In this way, harvested energy can be used for PVEH tuning.

In one example, the cantilever 102 is 1 mm thick aluminum and the cantilever 104 is 0.5 mm thick stainless steel. Complete dimensions of such a device are shown in FIG. 4B. As shown, the MFC 106 is bonded to the thinner cantilever 104. The thicker cantilever base 104 generates higher strain.

### Example 2

Referring to FIG. 2, a representative PVEH device 200 includes a cantilever base 202 to which a cantilever 202 is bonded. An MFH 206 or other piezoelectric device is secured to the cantilever base 202. Preferred locations 210, 212 for loading for tuning and application of vibrations, respectively, are indicated, but other locations can be used. Dimensions of such a PVEH device are shown in FIG. 4A.

### Example 3

Referring to FIG. 3, an energy harvesting system 300 includes a PVEH device 301 having a cantilever base 302 to which a cantilever 304 is secured. In this example, an MFH 308 is secured to the cantilever base 302 but in other examples, an MFH is secured to a cantilever instead of or in addition to a cantilever base. A tuning member 305 includes one or more IPMC devices such as IPMC devices 305A, 305B that are secured to each other at their ends. The tuning member 305 is coupled to a support 306 and is situated to contact the cantilever 304. Loading of the cantilever 304 can be varied based on a voltage or other electrical signal applied to the IPMC devices 305A, 305B and supplied by a control circuit 316. The MFH 308 is coupled to a full wave bridge (FWB) circuit 310 and rectified output from the MFH 308 is delivered to energy storage 312 such as a battery or capacitor. During setup or calibration, the control circuit 316 can be externally powered to vary loading provided by the IPMC devices 305A, 305B to the cantilever 304 while vibration is applied to the cantilever 302 at, for example, location 311. During energy harvesting the tuning load can be selected based on a voltage or other drive supplied by the FWB circuit 310 or the energy storage 312. In this case, the control circuit 316 can be a passive circuit. [resistive divider w voltage regulation). Typically, one or more rectifiers (such as the FWB circuit) are used to provide single polarity output for charging a capacitor or a battery, but energy storage can be based on bipolar output. A FWB is particularly useful for efficiency, but other arrangements of one or more rectifiers can be used.

FIG. 3A illustrates a representative tunable load member 305 that includes IPMCs 352, 354 that are coupled at a tip 356. A support member 360 secures ends 358, 359 of the IPMCs 352, 354, respectively, for application of a drive voltage that causes the IMPCs 352, 354 to bend so as to extend or contract.

FIG. 3B illustrates a circuit 370 that includes a full wave bridge (FWB) rectifier formed of diodes such as diode 372. The FWB is coupled to charge a capacitor 374 and to receive inputs voltages from a piezoelectric device 376.

FIG. 3C-3D illustrate a representative IPMC strip 380 having noble metal conductor layers 381, 382 that sandwich an ionic polymer membrane 384. If desired, additional electrical contacts can be formed on the conductor layer 381, 382 for electrical connection to a voltage source that provides a voltage VDRIVE that causes the IPMC strip 380 to deform as shown in FIG. 3D.

### Example 4

FIGS. 4A-4B illustrate representative examples of PVEH devices and shown typical dimensions. In FIG. 4A, a PVEH device 400 includes a cantilever base 402 to which a cantilever 406 is secured. An MFH 404 is bonded to the cantilever base 402. In FIG. 4B, a PVEH device 410 includes a cantilever base 412 to which a cantilever 416 is secured. An MFH 414 is bonded to the cantilever 412. In FIG. 4C, a PVEH device 420 includes a cantilever base 422 to which a cantilever 426 is secured. An MFH 424 is bonded to the cantilever 422. In FIGS. 4A-4C, preferred locations for loading for tuning and application of vibration are also shown.

### Example 5

FIG. 5 illustrates PVEH resonance frequency tuning by application of a voltage to IPMC devices that are situated to contact a PVEH cantilever. Curves 502, 504 illustrate tuning of two different device configurations and show that increased loading (i.e., larger voltages in this example) can increase resonance frequency. Such calibration curves can be used to select an operating load for a PVEH device and a control circuit can be configured to provide a suitable voltage using harvested energy if external energy sources are to be avoided. An external source can be used for tuning during harvesting. However, energy usage for tuning is preferably less than (or very much less than) energy harvested.

### Example 6

With reference to FIG. 6, a representative method 600 includes positioning a cantilever or cantilever base to receive vibrations such as ambient vibrations at 602. At 604, the cantilever is contacted with a tunable load member. At 606, it is determined if load calibration is available. If so, at 606, calibration data of resonance frequency versus load member drive is used to select a load member drive, and at 610, the PVEH device is situated for harvesting energy. If calibration is unavailable at 606, load member drive is varied at 602 to determined preference values for energy harvesting. At 614, the load member drive associated with maximum or other preferred values of energy harvesting is applied and at 610, energy is harvested.

### General Considerations

As used in this application and in the claims, the singular forms “a,” “an,” and “the” include the plural forms unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. Additionally, the term “includes” means “comprises.” Further, the term “coupled” does not exclude the presence of intermediate elements between the coupled items. The systems, apparatus, and methods described herein should not be construed as limiting in any way. Instead, the present disclosure is directed toward all novel and non-obvious features and aspects of the various disclosed embodiments, alone and in various combinations and sub-combinations with one another. The disclosed systems, methods, and apparatus are not limited to any specific aspect or feature or combinations thereof, nor do the disclosed systems, methods, and apparatus require that any one or more specific advantages be present or problems be solved. Any theories of operation are to facilitate explanation, but the disclosed systems, are not limited not limited to such theories of operation.

The examples above are described with reference to particular piezoelectric devices, cantilever materials, circuit configurations, and material dimensions for convenience but the disclosure is not to be limited to the explanatory configurations. Loading of cantilevers is illustrated using IPMCs but other actuators can be used. The terms “major surface” and “minor surface” refer to surfaces having larges and smaller surface areas, respectively, and are intended to distinguish the edge surfaces of substrates from larger surfaces. Tuning members can include IPMCs or other devices, and actuator mechanisms such as IPMCs can contact cantilever elements directly or use additional components for contact.

In view of the many possible embodiments to which the principles of the disclosure may be applied, it should be recognized that the illustrated embodiments are only preferred example and should not be taken as limiting. We therefore claim as our invention all that comes within the scope and spirit of these claims.

