# DESCRIPTION

## TECHNICAL FIELD OF THE INVENTION

This invention relates to rapid assays for detecting antimicrobial susceptibility in samples from patients suffering from a microbial infection. The invention is particularly suited for detecting antimicrobial susceptibility in urine from patients suffering from a Urinary Tract Infection (“UTI”).

## BACKGROUND TO THE INVENTION

As is well known, there is a crisis of resistance to antimicrobials (Andersson and Hughes 2010; Baker et al. 2018; Gelband and Laxminarayan 2015; Laxminarayan et al. 2016; Li et al. 2016; Macedo et al. 2013; Mendelson et al. 2017; Roca et al. 2015), caused in part by mis-prescribing. This mis-prescribing takes two forms: (i) potentially effective antibiotics are given when the infection is not bacterial, or (ii) the wrong (i.e. ineffective) antibiotics are given when it is. What would be desirable would be a very rapid means of knowing, even before a patient left a doctor's surgery, that a particular antibiotic was indeed capable of killing the organism of interest. While genotypic (whole-genome-sequencing) methods hold out some promise for this (Buchan and Ledeboer 2014; Didelot et al. 2012; Dunne et al. 2017; Kirkup et al. 2013; Koser et al. 2012; Kwong et al. 2015; Roach et al. 2015; Schmidt et al. 2016; Tsai et al. 2016; Tuite et al. 2014; van Belkum and Dunne 2013), what is really desired is a phenotypic assay (Farha and Brown 2010) that assesses the activity of anti-infectives in the sample itself (Kelley 2017; Murray et al. 2015; Schmiemann et al. 2010). However, since almost all antibiotics, whether bacteriostatic or bactericidal (Kohanski et al. 2007), indicate their efficacy or otherwise only when cells are attempting to replicate (Coates et al. 2011), it might be thought that this would be an unattainable goal simply because of the existence of a lag phase (described below).

Urinary tract infections (“UTIs”) are a worldwide patient problem (Schmiemann et al. 2010). Other than in hospital-acquired infections (Cek et al. 2014), they are particularly common in females, with 1 in 2 women experiencing a UTI at some point in their life (Foxman 2010). Escherichia coli is the most common causative pathogen of a UTI (Ejrnæs 2011; Foxman 2010; Mehnert-Kay 2005; Wilson and Gaido 2004). However, other Enterobacteriaceae such as Proteus mirabilis, Klebsiella spp. and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and even Gram-positive cocci such as staphylococci and enterococci, may also be found (Kline and Lewis 2016; Tandogdu and Wagenlehner 2016). Misapplication and overuse of antibiotics in primary care is a major source of antimicrobial resistance (Bryce et al. 2016; Cek et al. 2014; Tandogdu and Wagenlehner 2016), so it is important that the correct antibiotic is prescribed (Kerremans et al. 2008; Kirchhoff et al. 2018). Often prescribing none at all for asymptomatic UTIs is an adequate strategy (Koves et al. 2017).

We note, however, that E. coli cells in all conditions are highly heterogeneous (Kell et al. 2015), even if only because they are in different phases of the cell cycle (Wallden et al. 2016), and in both ‘exponential’ and stationary phase contain a variety of chromosome numbers (Åkerlund et al. 1995; Boye and Løbner-Olesen 1991; Skarstad et al. 1986; Skarstad et al. 1985; Steen and Boye 1980; Stokke et al. 2012). To discriminate them physiologically, and especially to relate them to culturability (a property of an individual), it is necessary to study them individually (Kell et al. 1991; Taheri-Araghi et al. 2015), typically using flow cytometry (Boye et al. 1983; Davey 2011; Davey and Kell 1996; Hewitt and Nebe-Von-Caron 2004; Kell et al. 1991; Müller et al. 1993; Nebe-von Caron and Badley 1995; Shapiro 2008, 2001; Shapiro 2003; Steen 1990). Flow cytometry has also been used to count microbes (and indeed white blood cells) for the purposes of assessing UTIs (Chien et al. 2007; Koken et al. 2002; Shang et al. 2013; Shayanfar et al. 2007; Wang et al. 2010), but not in these cases for antibiotic susceptibility testing. Single cell morphological imaging has also been used, where in favourable cases antibiotic susceptibility can be detected in 15-30 minutes or less (Baltekin et al. 2017; Choi et al. 2014).

A number of workers have recognised that flow cytometry has the potential to detect very rapid changes in both cell numbers, morphology (by light scattering) and physiology (via the addition of particular fluorescent stains that report on some element(s) of biochemistry or physiology). Boye and colleagues could see effects of penicillin on flow cytograms within an hour of its addition to sensitive strains (Boye et al. 1983). Similarly, Gant and colleagues (Gant et al. 1993) used forward and side scattering, and noticed antibiotic-dependent effects on the profiles after 3 h, but did not measure absolute counts. Later studies (Mason et al. 1994; Mason et al. 1995) used the negatively charged dye bis-(1,3-dibutyl-barbituric acid) trimethine oxonol (DiBAC4(3)), which increases its binding and hence fluorescence upon loss of membrane energisation (that decreases the activity of efflux pumps such as acrAB/tolC (Du et al. 2018; Iyer et al. 2015; Kessel et al. 1991)), and could detect susceptibility to penicillin and gentamicin in 2-5 h. Using a similar assay, Senyurek and colleagues (Senyurek et al. 2009) could detect it within 90 min. Other workers have used a variety of probes, but evaluation was after a much longer period, e.g. 24 h (Boi et al. 2015). Álvarez-Barrientos and colleagues (Álvarez-Barrientos et al. 2000) give an excellent review of work up to 2000, with some reports (e.g. (Walberg et al. 1997)) of detection of flow cytometrically observable changes in morphology (light scattering) at 30 min exposure to antibiotic. Flow cytometry has also been used to detect bacteriuria, although the numbers found seemed not to correlate well with CFUs (Pieretti et al. 2010). Most so-called ‘live/dead’ kits rely on the loss of membrane integrity to detect the permeability of DNA stains, but many effective antibiotics have little effect on this in the short term, and such kits do not assess proliferation (Kell et al. 1998).

A classical activity of general and laboratory microbiology involves the inoculation of a liquid nutrient broth with cells taken from a non-growing state, whether this be from long-term storage (typically in agar) or using cells that have been grown to stationary phase (Navarro Llorens et al. 2010), more or less recently, in another liquid batch culture. The result of this is that the cells will, in time, typically increase in number and/or biomass, often exponentially, but that this is preceded by a ‘lag phase’ (that may be subdivided (Schultz and Kishony 2013)) before any such increases. The length of the lag phase depends on various factors, including the nature of the nutrient media before and after inoculation, the inoculum density, pH, temperature, and the period of the previous stationary phase for that cell (Bertrand 2014; Finkel 2006; Himeoka and Kaneko 2017; Joers and Tenson 2016; Pin et al. 2009; Roostalu et al. 2008; Swinnen et al. 2004). It is usually estimated (and indeed defined) by extrapolating to its starting ordinate value a line on a plot of the logarithm of cell number, cfu or biomass against time (e.g. (Baranyi and Pin 1999; Baty and Delignette-Muller 2004; Baty et al. 2002; Pirt 1975; Prats et al. 2008; Prats et al. 2006; Swinnen et al. 2004)). However, because of the different (and generally lower) sensitivity of bulk optical estimates of biomass (Dalgaard et al. 1994; Madar et al. 2013; Swinnen et al. 2004), only the first two of these are normally considered to estimate the ‘true’ lag phase.

With some important exceptions (e.g. (Link et al. 2015; Madar et al. 2013; Novotna et al. 2003; Pin et al. 2009; Rolfe et al. 2012; Roostalu et al. 2008), the lag phase has been relatively little studied at a molecular level. From an applied point of view, however, at least two influences on it are considered desirable. Thus, a food microbiologist might wish to maximise the lag phase (potentially indefinitely) (e.g. (Baranyi and Roberts 1994)). By contrast, there are circumstances, as here, and not least in clinical microbiology, where it is desirable to be able to measure microbial growth/culturability, and its phenotypic sensitivity or otherwise to candidate anti-infective agents, in as short a time as possible. This necessarily involves minimising the length of the lag phase, and is the focus of the present studies.

There is evidence that the time before measurable biochemical changes occur during lag phases can be very small when inoculation is into rich medium (Link et al. 2015; Madar et al. 2013; Rolfe et al. 2012). Thus, Rolfe and colleagues (Rolfe et al. 2012) used Lysogeny Broth (LB) (and S. enterica), where lag phase or regrowth—as measured by changes in the transcriptome—initiated within 4 min (the earliest time point measured). The timescale in the plots of Madar and colleagues (Madar et al. 2013) does not admit quite such precise deconvolution, but responses in M9 with casamino acids (referred to as ‘immediate’) are consistent with a period of less than 10 min. Hong and colleagues recently detected such changes in under 30 min using stimulated Raman imaging (Hong et al. 2018), Yu and colleagues could do so with video microscopy (Yu et al. 2018), and Schoepp et al. (Schoepp et al. 2017) used molecular detection of suitable transcripts.

An object of the present invention is to provide an assay for detecting antimicrobial susceptibility in samples from patients suffering from a microbial infection. It is desirable that the assay be rapid and easy to conduct so as to be able to provide a fast and accurate result which would enable a physician to prescribe an antimicrobial therapy that would successfully treat the microbial infection. Ideally, the assay should be able to be used on a range of bodily fluids, such as blood, urine, mucus or saliva. It would also be desirable to provide a assay for detecting antimicrobial susceptibility in urine from patients suffering from UTIs.

## SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

In accordance with a first aspect of the present invention, there is provided, a method for rapidly determining the susceptibility of a microorganism to an antimicrobial agent comprising the steps:


- - a) contacting a first sample containing the microorganism with a
    first growth medium so as to form a first mixture, wherein the first
    growth medium is selected to enable the microorganism to proliferate
    and/or encourage the microorganism cell cycle to commence
    proliferation;
  - b) contacting a second sample containing the microorganism with a
    second growth medium so as to form a second mixture, wherein the
    second growth medium is substantially the same as the first growth
    medium but further comprises a first antimicrobial agent which may
    inhibit or slow the proliferation of the microorganism;
  - c) incubating the first and second mixtures, for 30 minutes or less,
    under conditions suitable to enable or encourage proliferation of
    the microorganism;
  - d) passing the first and second mixture, or portion thereof, through
    a flow cytometer in order to assess one or more biochemical and/or
    biophysical parameters of the microorganisms in both mixtures; and
  - e) comparing the parameters of the microorganisms in the first
    mixture with that of the second mixture, after incubation, in order
    to detect whether the first antimicrobial agent inhibits or slows
    the proliferation of the microorganism so as to determine the
    susceptibility of a microorganism to said agent.

In the method, step b) may further comprise contacting one or more further samples containing the microorganism with a one or more further growth media so as to form one or more further mixtures, wherein the one or more further growth media is the same as the first growth medium but further comprises one or more further antimicrobial agents which may inhibit or slow the proliferation of the microorganism, wherein said one or more further antimicrobial agents are different from one another and different from the first antimicrobial agent. Therefore, the provision of assessing one or more further samples with one or more further antimicrobial agents allows the method to assess the susceptibility of the microorganism to multiple antimicrobial agents. In a clinical setting, this would enable the physician to quickly identify which antimicrobial agent would be most successful in treating an infection.

In the method, step d) may additionally be conducted prior to and after step c) so that the one or more biochemical and/or biophysical parameters of a sample can be assessed prior to incubation.

The one or more biochemical and/or biophysical parameters of the microorganisms may be selected from one or more of the following: cell size, cell number, cell membrane energisation and/or nucleic acid content and/or distribution. The one or more biochemical and/or biophysical parameters of the microorganisms may be determined by assessing the uptake of one or more certain fluorescent or other stains.

The method of the present invention has a number of advantages. Firstly, the method can identify susceptibility of the microorganism to antimicrobial agents in a time frame of 30 minutes or less. This rapid method would allow a physician or medical professional (such as a nurse) to take a sample from a patient suspected or known to have an infection and then identify the most suitable and most effective antimicrobial agent in order to treat the infection.

When the parameter is cell size, cell number and/or cell membrane energisation, preferably, the medium further comprises a carbocyanine dye, or prior to step d), carbocyanine dye is added to the mixture or part of the mixture. A preferred carbocyanine dye comprises 3,3′-dipropylthiadicarbocyanine iodide (di-S-C3(5)). The carbocyanine dye may be added to the growth medium or mixture so that it is present at a concentrate in the range of about 1 μM to about 5 μM, and preferably in the range of about 3 μM. When the parameter is cell size, cell number and/or cell membrane energisation, preferably, the flow cytometer relies upon excitation at a particular wavelength and assessment in a particular wavelength range. For example, the flow cytometer may rely upon excitation at 640 nm and the parameters are assessed at 675±15 nm. Alternative wavelengths will also be evident to the skilled addressee. For example, the flow cytometer may rely upon excitation at around 633 or 638 nm.

When the parameter is nucleic acid, preferably, said nucleic acid comprises DNA. Prior to step d), mithramycin and/or a nucleic acid stain may be added to the mixture or part of the mixture, and optionally, DNA distribution is assessed on the flow cytometer at around 572 nm. When the parameter is DNA analyses, preferably, the cells are fixed by injection into ethanol, washed twice by centrifugation in a M-Tris/HCl buffer, before resuspension in the same buffer containing mithramycin and/or nucleic acid stain, MgCl2, and NaCl. The nucleic acid stain may comprise a cyanine, such as SYBR Green or ethidium bromide. More preferably, cells are fixed by injection into ice-cold ethanol to a final concentration of about 70%, washed twice by centrifugation in 0.1 M-Tris/HCl buffer, about pH 7.4, before resuspension in the same buffer containing mithramycin (50 μg mL-1) and ethidium bromide (25 μg mL-1), MgCl2, (25 mM) and NaCl (100 mM).

It will be apparent that the growth medium employed would be determined by the type of microorganism for which the sample is being tested and/or from which type of environment the microorganism has been removed. For example, the growth medium of Terrific Broth has been shown to be effective as a growth medium when assessing a microorganism in urine samples from individuals suffering from a urinary tract infection.

Likewise, step c) will take place at a temperature which is suitable for the proliferation of the microorganism for which the sample is being tested and/or from which type of environment the microorganism has been removed. For example, step c) will take place at a temperature in the range of about 35° C. and 40° C., and preferably at a temperature of about 37° C., when assessing a microorganism in samples from individuals suffering from an infection.

A portion of the first and second mixture, or portion of the one or more further mixtures may be assessed at multiple time points. It is preferred that the multiple time points comprise one or more of the following time points, 0 minutes, 5 minutes, 10 minutes, 15 minutes, 20 minutes, 25 minutes and/or 30 minutes or any additional or alternative intervening time points or selection of time points thereof. Preferably, step c) is about 20 minutes or less. Most preferably, step c) is in the range of about 15 minutes to about 20 minutes.

Ideally, a portion of the first and second mixture, or portion of the one or more further mixtures is assessed prior to, and after, step c). This allows for a reference of the microorganism in a growth arrested state verses the microorganism in a state of proliferate and/or a state of cell cycle change in order to commence proliferation.

It will apparent that the microorganism may be obtained from a biological sample derived from an individual believed to be suffering from a microorganism infection. The microorganism may be obtained from a biological sample derived from an individual believed to be suffering from a bacterial or viral infection in which case the method may be used to assess whether the infection is of a bacterial or viral nature and help to direct the therapeutic or course of treatment. Preferably, the method will identify a change in one or more biochemical and/or biophysical parameters of the microorganisms against one or more antibacterial agents so as determine that the patient is suffering from a bacterial infection where the bacteria is susceptible for the antibacterial agent. However, if method does not identify a change in one or more biochemical and/or biophysical parameters of the microorganisms against any of the antibacterial agents then this may be determinative that the patient is suffering from a viral infection and the appropriate course of action (such as the administration of antivirals) taken.

The samples may be derived directly from body fluids, such as urine, blood, mucus or saliva. Alternatively, the samples may be pre-treated with reagents or buffers or filtered prior to being contacted with the growth medium.

The microorganism infection may be a Urinary Tract Infection (UTI).

In a related embodiment of the present invention, there is a provided a method as herein above described for determining the antimicrobial agent for use in the treatment of a microorganism infection in an individual, wherein the method comprises taking a biological sample from the individual, assessing the susceptibility of the microorganism, in the biological sample, to two or more antimicrobial agents and identifying which antimicrobial agent to administer to the individual based which antimicrobial agent inhibits or slows the proliferation of the microorganism.

In a further related embodiment of the present invention, there is provided a kit for rapidly determining the susceptibility of a microorganism to an antimicrobial agent comprising:


- - a) an enriched growth medium;
  - b) one or more antimicrobial agents; and
  - c) a carbocyanine dye.

The kit may further comprise:


- - d) a flow cytometer, optionally, with at least one red laser.

It is preferable that the enriched growth medium comprises Terrific Broth, although it will be apparent that other enriched growth media may also be used and may be directed by the microorganism suspected to be in a sample.

It will be understood that the kit as herein above described, may be for use in the method as hereinabove described.

Unexpectedly and advantageously, the inventors had recognising that bacteria in UTIs may actually be growing (albeit slowly) and not in a ‘stationary’ phase, so they decided to assess the ability of quantitative flow cytometry to determine bacterial cell numbers, and the effects of antibiotics thereon, on as rapid a timescale as possible. Their findings show that it is indeed possible to discriminate antibiotic-susceptible and—resistant strains in under 30 mins at levels (104-5·mL−1) characteristic (Detweiler et al. 2015; Mody and Juthani-Mehta 2014) of bacteriuria. Advantageously, this opens up the possibility of ensuring that a correct prescription is given to the patient at the surgery due to the short timing between a sample being taken and the identification of the correct antibiotic which can be prescribed and/or dispensed whilst the patient is still at the surgery.

Because different probes and different antibiotics have different effects (and with different kinetics) on membrane integrity, it was decided that the best strategy would be to look at the ability of antibiotics to inhibit proliferation directly, distinguishing bacteria from non-living scattering material via the use of a positively charged dye that energised living cells accumulate. Rhodamine 123 is a very popular dye of this type, but without extra chemical treatments that would inhibit proliferation is effective only in Gram-positive organisms (Kaprelyants and Kell 1993, 1992). However, the positively charged carbocyanine dye 3,3′-dipropylthiadicarbocyanine iodide (di-S-C3(5)) (Waggoner 1976; Waggoner 1979) seems to bind to and/or be accumulated by both Gram-positive and -negative bacteria, and provides a convenient means of detecting them.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Microbial Strains.

E. coli MG1655 and a series of sensitive and resistant strains were taken from a laboratory collection.

Culture

E. coli strains were grown from inocula of appropriate concentrations in conical flasks using Lysogeny Broth to an optical density (600 nm) of 1.5-2, representing stationary phase in this medium. They were held in stationary phase for 2-4 h before being inoculated at concentration of 105 cells·mL−1 (or as noted) into Terrific Broth (Tartof and Hobbs 1987). We did not here study cells held in a long stationary phase (Finkel 2006; Navarro Llorens et al. 2010) (exceeding 3d).

Assessment of Growth by Bulk OD Measurements

Bulk OD measurements were performed in 96-well plates and read at 600 nm as per the manufacturer's instructions in an Omega plate reader spectrophotometer (BMG Labtech, UK) instrument. The ‘background’ due to scattering from the plates, etc., was not subtracted.

Flow Cytometry

Initial studies used a Sony SH-800 instrument, but all studies reported here used an Intellicyt® iQue screener PLUS. This instrument is based in significant measure on developments by Sklar and colleagues (e.g. (Edwards et al. 2009; Sklar et al. 2007; Tegos et al. 2014)), and uses segmented flow (Skeggs 1957) to sample from 96- or 384-well U- or V-bottom plates prior to their analysis. The iQue Plus contains three excitation sources (405 nm, 488 nm, 640 nm) and 7 fixed filter detectors (with a midpoint/range in nm of 445/45, 530/30, 572/28, 585/40, 615/24, 675/30, 780/60, giving 13 fluorescence channels) whose outputs are stored as both ‘height’ and area, using the FCS3.0 data file standard (Seamer et al. 1997). Forward and side scatter are obtained from the 488 nm excitation source. Detection channels are referred to by the laser used (405 nm violet VL, 488 nm blue BL, and 640 nm red RL) and the detector number in order of possible detectors with a longer wavelength. Thus RL1, as used for detecting di-S-C3(5), implies the red laser and the 675/30 detector. Data are collected from all channels, using a dynamic range of 7 logs. Many parameters may be used to vary the precise performance of the instrument. Those we found material to provide the best reproducibility and to minimise carryover, and their selected values, are as follows: Automatic prime—60 secs (in Qsol buffer); Pre-plate shake—15 s and 1500 rpm; Sip time—2 s (actual sample uptake); Additional sip time—0.5 s (the gap between sips); Pump speed—29 rpm (1.5 μL·s−1 sample uptake); Plate model—U-bottom well plate (for 96 well plates); Mid plate cleanup—After every well (4 washes; 0.5 s each in Qsol buffer); Inter-well shake—1500 rpm; after 6 wells, 4 sec in Qsol buffer; Flush and Clean—30 sec with Decon and Clean buffers followed by 60 sec with deionised water. The Forecyt™ software supplied with the instrument may be used to gate and display all the analyses post hoc. It, and the FlowJo software, were used in the preparation of the cytograms shown. Where used, di-S-C3(5) was present at a final concentration of 3 μM; its analysis used excitation at 640 nm and detection at 675±15 nm, the fluorescence channel being referred to as RL1. For DNA analyses, cells were fixed by injection into ice-cold ethanol (final concentration 70%), washed twice by centrifugation in 0.1 M-Tris/HCl buffer, pH 7.4, before resuspension in the same buffer containing mithramycin (50 μg mL−1) and ethidium bromide (25 μg mL−1), MgCl2, (25 mM) and NaCl (100 mM) (Boye et al. 1983). Under these circumstances, the excitation energy absorbed by mithramycin (excitation 405 or 488 nm) is transferred to the ethidium bromide, providing a large Stokes shift (emission at 572, 585 or 615 nm; we chose 572 nm as it provided the best signal) and high selectivity for DNA (as mithramycin does not bind to RNA). All the solutions and media used were filtered through 0.2 μm filter.

UTI Samples

Following ethics approval from the University of Manchester and the obtaining of signed consent forms, patients attending the Firsway clinic with suspected UTI were offered to opportunity to have their urine samples analysed by our method as well as the reference method used in a centralised pathology laboratory. Samples were taken at various times during the day, kept at 4° C., delivered to the Manchester laboratory by taxi, plated out (LB agar containing as appropriate the stated antibiotics at 3 times normal MIC) to assess microbial numbers and antibiotic sensitivity, the remaining sample kept again at 4° C., and analysed flow cytometrically within 18 h. For flow cytometric assessment, cells were diluted into 37° C. Terrific Broth containing 3 μM diS-C3(5) plus any appropriate antibiotic, and assayed as above. For other experiments (not shown) cells were filtered (0.45 μm) and diluted as appropriate into warmed terrific broth. No significant differences were discernible in the two methods.

Reagents

All reagents were of analytical grade where available. Flow cytometric dyes were obtained from AAT Bioquest.

Results

Initial Assessment of Regrowth by Bulk Light Scattering Measurements in 96-Well Plates

FIG. 1 shows a typical lag phase from an inoculum of 105 cells·mL−1 that had spent 4 h in stationary phase when inoculated into Terrific Broth (Tartof and Hobbs 1987) as observed by bulk OD measurements. For strain MG1655 it amounts to some 230 min, while it is lower (2.5-3 h) for the more virulent clinical isolates (not shown). A rule of thumb states that an OD of 1 is approximately equal to 0.5 mg·mL−1 dry weight bacteria or ˜109·cells·mL−1 for E. coli. Thus, the change in OD if 105 cells·mL−1 increase their number by 50% is ˜0.00015, which is immeasurably small in this instrument. Given the noise in the system (probably mainly due to fluctuations in the incident light intensity), it is reasonable that we might, in this system, detect changes in OD of 0.01 (˜107 cells·mL−1), which requires a 100-fold increase in cell number over the inoculum (˜7 doublings). With a true lag phase of 10-15 min, and a doubling time of 20 min, this is indeed roughly what can be observed (FIG. 1)(see also (Chandra and Singh 2018; Pin and Baranyi 2006, 2008)). When samples were taken from the same strain and plated out to estimate proliferation by CFU, the results were indeed equally consistent with those at the longer times (FIG. 1).

Flow Cytometric Assessment of Cells and Cell Proliferation

FIG. 2A shows a typical set of traces of multiple wells from the Intellicyt iQue, each containing an inoculum of 105 cells·mL−1. Each analysis is of 3 μL (taking 2 s), and the good reproducibility is evident, especially in the inset stacked plot. We also show (rear trace) the cytograms of a bead cocktail; this FIG. 2B shows that the distribution in cell properties is significantly greater than that of beads, and its significant width is thus not due to any inadequacies in the detector. The quality of a ‘high-throughput’ (or indeed any other) assay is nowadays widely assessed using the Z′ statistic (Zhang et al. 1999). This is given, for an assay in which the sample's readout exceeds that of the control, as:

Z′=1−3(SD Sample+SD control)/(mean of sample−mean of control)  Eq. 1.

It is normally considered (Zhang et al. 1999) that a Z′ factor exceeding 0.5 provides for a satisfactory assay.

FIGS. 2C and 2D show the full cytograms for forward scatter and side scatter, respectively vs RL1, illustrating the amount of small particulates remaining in terrific broth, despite extensive filtering. Consequently, we used a series of gates to assess solely the bacteria in our samples. These are shown in FIG. 2E.

FIG. 3 shows cytograms at various times after inoculation of the stationary phase (LB-grown) cells into Terrific Broth, along with labels of cell numbers within the regions of interest. These allow the assessment of the Z′ values as per equation 1. From FIG. 3B it may be observed that Z′>0.5 from as early as 20 min, this then representing the earliest that we can robustly detect proliferation. Changes in cell constitution as judged by light scatter can, however, be detected from the earliest time point (5 min, FIG. 3A top left). It is noteworthy that the proliferation (as measured by the increase in cell numbers on the ordinate) is paralleled, at least initially, by an increase in uptake of the carbocyanine dye (on the abscissa); as the cells ‘wake up’ they become increasingly energised, until they settle down (also observed via side scatter). For a lower concentration of starting inoculum (5×104 cells·mL−1), the Z′>0.5 from 25 min as shown in FIG. 3C.

Flow Cytometric Assessment of Antibiotic Sensitivity

FIG. 4 shows similar data for a resistant (FIG. 4A,B) and a sensitive strain (FIG. 4C,D) in the absence ((4A,C) and presence (FIG. 4B,D) of the antibiotic ampicillin, applied at three times the known MIC (MIC=32 mg·L−1)) (http://www.eucast.org/fileadmin/src/media.PDFs/EUCAST_files/Breakpoint_tables/v_8.1_Breakpoint_Tables.pdf) (The European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing. Breakpoint tables for interpretation of MICs and zone diameters. Version 8.1, 2018. http://www.eucast.org.). It is clear that the susceptible strain differs (and thereby can be discriminated) from the resistant strain in at least three ways: (i) the kinetics of changes in cell numbers as judged by RL1 counts, (ii) the same as judged by forward (not shown) or side scatter, (iii) kinetic changes in the magnitude of the fluorescence.

Since we had seen rapid changes in side scatter within 5 min (FIG. 3) it was also of interest to study this as a means of detecting antibiotic sensitivity. FIG. 5 shows that the changes in side scatter also differs noticeably between sensitive and resistant strains in 5-10 minutes, albeit that limited proliferation was taking place.

Of course different antibiotics have different modes of action (Brochado et al. 2018; Zampieri et al. 2018), and the optimal readout needs to reflect this. Thus, nitrofurantoin is widely prescribed for UTIs and its effects on our standard laboratory system are shown in FIG. 6A,B (cytograms of side scatter and RL1, respectively). The effects on cell proliferation of nitrofurantoin and several other antibiotics are given in FIG. 6C. Note that the initial and later cell numbers for nitrofurantoin appear lower because this antibiotic absorbs light at the excitation wavelength (its peak is at 620 nm). Both the bacteriostatic (trimethoprim) and bactericidal (ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, nitrofurantoin) antibiotics can be seen to work effectively on this sensitive strain.

Flow Cytometric Assessment of DNA Distributions

Another important strategy for detecting bacteria uses their DNA (e.g. (Hammes and Egli 2010; Jernaes and Steen 1994; Müller and Nebe-von-Caron 2010)). Thus, another high-level guide to the physiology of E. coli cells and cultures is the flow cytometrically observable distribution of DNA therein, as this can vary widely as a function of growth substrate, temperature, and during the cell cycle (Boye and Løbner-Olesen 1991; Skarstad et al. 1986; Skarstad et al. 1985; Steen and Boye 1980; Stokke et al. 2012). Specifically, the solution to the problem that DNA replication rates are fixed while growth rates can both vary and exceed them is to allow multiple replication forks in a given cell (Cooper and Helmstetter 1968). To this end, we compared the DNA distributions of our cultures under various conditions. FIG. 7A shows both stationary phase and exponentially growing cells stained with a mithramycin-ethidium bromide cocktail as per the protocol of Skarstad and colleagues given in Materials and Methods. As they have previously observed (Boye et al. 1983; Skarstad et al. 1985), (very slowly growing or) stationary phase cells display either one or two chromosome complements, while those growing exponentially in lysogeny broth (LB medium) can have as many as eight or more chromosomes. This is entirely consistent with the basic and classical Cooper-Helmstetter model (Cooper and Helmstetter 1968) and more modern refinements (Sauls et al. 2016; Si et al. 2017; Willis and Huang 2017; Zheng et al. 2016). To this end, FIG. 7B shows changes in the DNA distribution of cells taken from a similar regrowth experiment to that in FIG. 2. It is evident that both the one- and two-chromosome-containing cells from the stationary phase initiate increases in their DNA content on the same kinds of timescale as may be observed from both direct cell counting (proliferation) and carbocyanine fluorescence, with the initially bimodal DNA distribution morphing into a more monomodal one. This implies that the initial increase in cell numbers over 15 min or so involves cells that were about to divide actually dividing, and provides another useful metric of cellular (cell cycling) activity, albeit one that requires sampling as the cells must be permeabilised, at least for this protocol.

Flow Cytometric Analysis of UTI Samples

Finally, we wished to determine whether this method, as developed in laboratory cultures, could be applied to candidate UTI specimens ‘as received’ in a doctor's surgery. To this end, we analysed 23 samples, of which six were in fact positive as judged by a reference method performed in a central microbiology laboratory. Each of these was also found to be positive using our methods, and with the antibiotic sensitivities given in Table 1 below. These were again consistent with the reference method.

Typical cytograms for sensitive and resistant strains are given in FIG. 8. The positive cultures were speciated centrally, and in each case the organism was found to be E. coli.

## DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

It is often considered that the lag′ phase of bacterial growth is one in which very little is happening, and that what is happening is happening quite slowly. This notion probably stems from the fact that changes in OD observable by the naked eye in laboratory cultures (Kaprelyants and Kell 1993) are indeed quite sluggish. However, the very few papers that have studied this in any detail (Baltekin et al. 2017; Madar et al. 2013; Novotna et al. 2003; Pin et al. 2009; Rolfe et al. 2012; Roostalu et al. 2008; Schoepp et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2018) have found that changes in expression profiles (albeit mainly measured at a bulk level) actually occur on a very rapid timescale indeed, possibly in 4 minutes or less following reinoculation into a rich growth medium. For antibiotics to have an observable, and in terms of sensitivity to them a differentially observable, effect on cells, the cells need to be in a replicative state. This might be thought to preclude any such observations in the lag phase, but what is clear from the present observations is that cells can re-initiate or continue their cell cycles very rapidly, such that observable proliferation can occur in as little as 15-20 min after reinoculation of starved, stationary phase cells into rich medium. Consequently it is not necessary to wait for a full period of ‘lag-plus-first-division time’ (Baltekin et al. 2017), which can be well over one hour (Pin and Baranyi 2006, 2008). The rapid proliferation that we describe could be observed by light scattering, by cell counting, by carbocyanine fluorescence (membrane energisation), and by changes in the magnitude and distribution of DNA in the population. This has allowed us to determine, using any or all of these phenotypic assays, antibiotic susceptibility at a phenotypic level in what would appear to be a record time. Pin and Baranyi (Pin and Baranyi 2006, 2008) observed a more stochastic and somewhat slower process than that which we observed here, but in their case they were measuring CFU only, and the inoculation was into the less rich LB, while we used Terrific Broth. Indeed, the exit from lag phase can be very heterogeneous when organisms are measured individually (Aguirre et al. 2013; Aguirre and Koutsoumanis 2016; Baltekin et al. 2017; Stylianidou et al. 2016).

While we did not study this at the level of the transcriptome here, the dynamics of the physiological changes observed during the early lag and regrowth phases as observed by the uptake of the carbocyanine dye are of interest. Classically, its uptake has been considered to reflect a transmembrane potential difference (negative inside) (e.g. (Bashford 1981; Ghazi et al. 1981; Johnson et al. 1981; Shapiro 2000; Waggoner 1976; Waggoner 1979), but cf. (Felle et al. 1978)) based on bilayer-mediated equilibration according to the Nernst equation (Rottenberg 1979). However, we recognise that such cyanine dyes, much as ethidium bromide (Jernaes and Steen 1994) and other xenobiotics (Kell et al. 2013; Kell and Oliver 2014), are likely to be both influx and efflux substrates for various transporters (Wu et al. 2015), so such an interpretation should be treated with some caution.

A similar strategy may usefully be applied to other cells (including pathogens in more difficult matrices such as urine), other antibiotics and other stains. However, the present work provides a very useful springboard for these by showing that one may indeed expect to be able to determine antibiotic susceptibility in a phenotypic assay in 20 minutes or less. This could be a very useful attribute in the fight against anti-microbial resistance.

The forgoing embodiments are not intended to limit the scope of the protection afforded by the claims, but rather to describe examples of how the invention may be put into practice.

