# Experimental Design.

## MagLev Device.

We establish the magnetic field in the MagLev system by aligning two NdFeB magnets (5cm x 5cm x 2.5cm) co-axially, 4.5cm apart, with like poles facing each other.

The relative position of an object in the vertical direction when placed in the MagLev device, its "levitation height", is reached when the gravitational (F g ) and magnetic forces (F m ) acting, [3] in opposite directions, on the object have the same magnitude. [3] We define the levitation height as "h" in Figure 1. This position correlates, linearly, with the density of the sample. The analytical expression (and the associated assumptions and approximation) for correlating the levitation height of the sample with their density are described elsewhere. [3] A detailed knowledge of the parameters involved in making this correlation (e.g., the density of the paramagnetic medium, magnetic susceptibility of the medium, the magnetic field at the surface of the magnets) or a comprehensive understanding of the physics of MagLev are not necessary and can by disregarded when density measurements are made with standards of known density.

## Choice of Analytes.

The objects commonly encountered in crime scenes (smokeless gunpowder, fibers, hair, glitter, etc.) are diamagnetic, and thus interact weakly with an applied magnetic field. MagLev of these samples is achieved by placing them in a solution containing a strongly paramagnetic ion. In a magnetic field gradient, suspended in a paramagnetic fluid medium, diamagnetic samples appear to be repelled from regions of high magnetic field; in actuality, the diamagnetic object displaces an equal volume of paramagnetic solution, and it is the attractive interaction between this paramagnetic volume and the regions of high magnetic field and this paramagnetic volume that results in MagLev. We and others have shown that a variety of aqueous solutions of paramagnetic salts (e.g., MnCl 2 , MnSO 4 , GdCl 3 , FeCl 3 , CuSO 4 , etc.) and chelated paramagnetic ions (e.g., Gd(DTPA) and Mn(EDTA); both in aqueous and non-aqueous solutions) are suitable for MagLev. [3][4][5][6] Operating Procedure.

In the MagLev experiments presented here, we placed each sample in a 1 cm × 1 cm × 4.5 cm cuvette containing MnCl 2 (chosen because the solutions are transparent and because manganese salts are inexpensive), capped the cuvette, and then inverted the cuvette several times to remove any bubbles that may have formed on the samples. We explored the benefits of using a degassed MnCl 2 solution, of adding a small amount of detergent (Tween 20, 0.1% (vol/vol)) to the MnCl 2 solution, and sonicating the sample when preparing the glitter samples. The addition of detergent lowers the surface tension of the aqueous paramagnetic medium, and reduced interactions between hydrophobic objects, as well as their interactions with the walls of the cuvette. Bubbles that form on the walls of the cuvette and on the sample itself can be removed with sonication or by using a sample that has been degassed (e.g., bubbles present on the sample are absorbed into the degassed solution). The presence of a bubble on a sample can greatly influence its overall density (e.g., the density of air is 0.00118 g/cm 3 at 25 o C at standard pressure). [7] We placed the cuvette between the magnets, and took a photograph once the samples reached a stable levitation height (~ 3 minutes, Figure 2). We used ImageJ, a freeware image-processing package available from the NIH [8] , to determine the levitation height of each sample. Each photograph contained a ruler with millimeter markings, which we used as a reference when determining levitation height values. To analyze each image: we imported the color photograph into ImageJ and converted it into a gray scale image; we then adjusted the contrast using the "auto contrast" function and had the software outline the areas of high contrast with the "find edges" function; we then measured the distance from the bottom of the cuvette to the center of the outlined object.

We compared the levitation height determined from the ImageJ with that of the ruler in the photograph. We used density standard beads (purchased from American Density Materials Inc., Staunton, VA) to calibrate each measurement. The accuracy of each standard was ±0.0002 g/cm 3 . Polymers, of known density, may also be used in MagLev experiments as a density standard.

## Glitter Samples.

Glitter is a synthetic product, whose composition can range from tiny pieces of aluminum foil to multiple layers of plastic with (or without) an applied metal layer. [9] Glitter is, in many ways, an ideal contact trace: it is nearly invisible; has a high probability of transfer and retention; is highly individualistic; can be quickly collected and separated; small traces are easily characterized; and measured properties of the glitter particles can be placed into a searchable database. [9,10] Glitter particles can be characterized by a large number of methods: i) Visual inspection of color, shape, size, and morphology. This approach is problematic, however, as many glitter pieces do not contain dyes or pigments, or have "color shifting" effects that vary with lighting and the angle of observation. ii) The thickness of the glitter particles can be measured mechanically or spectroscopically. iii) Attenuated total reflection (ATR) FTIR and Raman microspectroscopy provide insight into the chemical structure of the polymers and coatings used in glitter production. [9] Glitter particles, from a commercial vendor, have density values ranging from 1.2 -2.5 g/cm 3 . [11] Density measurements of glitter particles could provide valuable insight when: i) Two glitter pieces that have a similar shape and color have different densities. ii) Two pieces of glitter are composed of the same polymer base but differ in density because of the materials applied to them (organic dyes, polymeric materials, and metal particles). iii) The heterogeneity of a glitter sample may also be determined from MagLev measurements, based on the range of observed levitation heights.

## Smokeless Gun Powder Samples.

Smokeless powders are a class of explosive propellant, consisting of gelatinized nitrocellulose with double base powders containing nitroglycerin, that produce very little smoke upon deflagration. [12] The decomposition of each of these compounds, results in the release of nitrates, and requires that a stabilizer be added, typically diphenylamine. [13] The ratio of each of these materials, as well as methods of batch preparation, result in density differences in smokeless gunpowder samples/batches. Smokeless powders are encountered in forensic science in the form of residues from gunshots or explosive devices. [14] The shape and size of the powder particles have marked differences on the burning rate and power generation, with many powders being disk-, cylinder-, or ballshaped. There are a number of analytical techniques that are used to narrow the number of brands of smokeless powders to one or a few; this process begins with morphological characterization and proceeds to other types of physical and chemical characteristics. [15] Analysis of MagLev Data.

We prepared stock solutions of MnCl 2 and used them throughout the experiments. The use of density standard beads ensured that minor changes in the relative MnCl 2 concentration were accounted for. The Results and Discussion section provides detailed information of the concentrations of MnCl 2 and the density of the standards used in each experiment.

We made seven measurements of levitation height for each sample. We measured the distance from the surface of the bottom magnet to the vertical midpoint of each object to determine its levitation height. In a single measurement of levitation height, we placed three pieces of gunpowder or 10 -20 pieces of glitter in the appropriate MnCl 2 solution. [16] We placed a ruler, with millimeter markings, next to the cuvette containing the sample to make preliminary measurements of height and to aid in making height relationships by eye. We measured the levitation height of each object with the ImageJ software package. We determined the average height of the glitter (or gunpowder) samples, as well as their deviation from the mean, for each MagLev measurement. The standard deviations reported in this work were calculated with standard error propagation methods, [17] and account for each MagLev measurement.

# Results and Discussion.

MagLev as an Analytical Tool in Forensic Science.

We measured the density of eleven samples of glitter, each of which was silver in color, by MagLev. We obtained glitter samples from Meadowbrook Inventions and Table 1 summarizes their properties. We levitated each sample of glitter in an aqueous solution of 3.0M MnCl 2 ; we used density standard beads with densities of 1.350 and 1.450 g/cm 3 to extrapolate the density of each piece of glitter. Figure 3a contains images of Crystalina #321 (Table 1) at 0 and 360 seconds after the cuvette of glitter was placed in the MagLev device. We waited for approximately three minutes before obtaining photographs of the glitter and gunpowder samples, based on the time series photos obtained in Figure 2.

The density of each glitter sample was measured using MagLev, with a precision of ±0.001 g/cm 3 , and compared with the density values provided by the manufacturer.

The relative standard deviation for each glitter sample was less than 3.0%.

The measured densities for the eleven glitter samples can be broken down into three categories, when compared to the density values reported by the manufacturer: in high agreement with an average density difference of less than 0.05 g/cm 3 , moderate agreement with an average density difference of greater than 0.05 g/cm 3 but less than 0.10 g/cm 3 , and low agreement with an average density difference of greater than 0.10 g/cm 3 . Seven samples were in high agreement with the reported density values, two samples were in moderate agreement, and two samples differed by more than 1.0 g/cm 3 from the reported density values (Alpha Jewels I and II). It should be noted that each of the density values measured by MagLev are less than those reported by the manufacturer, however when rounded to an equivalent number of significant figures six of the eleven samples match.

We determined the density of a glitter sample, of unknown density, from commercial nail polish. We separated the glitter particles from the polish by dissolving 0.5 g of the product in 5 mL of acetone, which we then collected by passing the solution through a piece of Whatman 1 quantitative filter paper. A similar procedure for extracting shimmer particles from make up samples has been reported by Griggs et al. [18] The density of the glitter contained in "New York Color starry silver glitter" (1.274 ± 0.034 g/cm 3 ) and "Sally Hansen diamond strength no chip nail polish" (1.276 ± 0.025 g/cm 3 ) was determined. To ensure that the extraction process employed successfully removed any polish residue from the glitter particles and thus provided an accurate density measurement, we placed approximately 30 pieces of Alpha Jewels I glitter (1.394 ± 0.002 g/cm 3 ) into 0.25g of Sally Hansen diamond strength nail polish and repeated the extraction and collection process. We compared the levitation height (i.e., the density) of the Alpha Jewels before and after acetone extraction, and found the height of each sample to be within the standard deviation of the measurement. This method of extracting glitter from nail polish samples is, thus, an accurate means of obtaining density values from complex cosmetic matrices.

We determined the density of six smokeless gunpowder samples; the results are summarized in Figure 4b. We levitated each sample in 4.0 M MnCl 2 (except for Hercules Red Dot, which we levitated in 3.0 M MnCl 2 ) with 1.4500 and 1.8000 g/cm 3 density standard beads. We investigated the effect of repeated exposure and/or prolonged exposure to an aqueous MnCl 2 solution, which are very acidic in nature with a pH of ~ 3.0, on the density of gunpowder samples. We placed Hercules Blue Dot samples into a solution of 4.0 M MnCl 2 and the density was measured every 24 hours for a total of seven days. The presence of density standards provided a means of accounting for evaporation of water from the solution, and thus changes in the solution density. The change in the average density of the gunpowder after seven days of exposure to aqueous MnCl 2 was 0.012 g/cm 3 , which is within the standard deviation of the initial measurements.

The density of Hercules Blue Dot gunpowder is also not affected by repeated exposures to MnCl 2 solution. We levitated a sample of gunpowder for ten consecutive measurements, to determine if repeated exposure to MnCl 2 causes changes in the density of the sample. We placed the gunpowder into MnCl 2 solution, levitated it in the MagLev device, removed it from the MnCl 2 solution, rinsed it with water, dried it with nitrogen, and repeated the process. The levitation height variation for each measurement was within the standard deviation determined in Figure 4b.

## Density-based separation of mixtures with MagLev.

MagLev can also separate a mixture of objects by their density. We separated a mixture of glitter of similar size and shape (Mirror Crystalina I and Chrome Silver 1P), which were indistinguishable by eye as they have the same shape and size, however their relative thicknesses are easily determined with a light microscope (Figure 5a). A mixture of multiple densities is readily separated in the MagLev device (Figure 5b), this allows samples that are indistinguishable by eye (or by microscopy) to be separated. An added benefit of separation by MagLev is that samples can be readily sorted: a mixture is placed within the MagLev device, each sample reaches it appropriate levitation height based on density, the sample is removed from the magnet and each discreet sample is collected before the mixture recombines (e.g., glitter is readily removed from the MagLev solution with a pipette).

## Sources of Error in a MagLev Measurement.

There are a number of errors that can result in an inaccurate density measurement; therefore care must be taken when performing a measurement with MagLev. Errors in solution preparation can result in measured density values that are higher or lower than expected.

Incorrect density measurements can also arise if the concentration of the paramagnetic solution changes over time (e.g., by solvent evaporation). Density standards afford an absolute measure of density and reduce incorrect readings caused by variations in the concentration of ions in the paramagnetic solution. An added benefit of using density standards is that measurements made in different laboratories and under different experimental conditions (i.e., temperature, humidity, etc.) are comparable.

The presence of air bubbles on a sample results in a density measurement that is less than the true density value because air is much less dense than a typical sample. It is important to eliminate air bubbles from a sample before conducting a measurement. We measured the density of a glitter sample (Mirror Crystalina I) in cuvettes containing 3.0 M MnCl 2 solutions prepared under a variety of conditions: a MnCl 2 solution, a MnCl 2 solution containing 0.1% (vol/vol) detergent (Tween 20), and a MnCl 2 solution that was degassed. The glitter sample was added to each solution, inverted several times to thoroughly mix the glitter particles, inspected by eye for the presence of bubbles, and a density measurement taken. The average levitation height for each sample preparation was within the standard error of the other measurements (i.e., within 95% confidence, with n = 7 measurements of 20 pieces of glitter per measurement).

We then sonicated each cuvette for 20 seconds to remove excess, and difficult to see, bubbles that had collected on the walls of the cuvette or the samples. In the absence of detergent, sonication of the samples resulted in a number of glitter particles adhering to the walls of the cuvette that were very difficult to remove. The spread of levitation heights of glitter within the cuvette was reduced when detergent was present and the sample was sonicated. Removing bubbles from samples is imperative to obtain an accurate density measurement. We found that adding a small amount of detergent (Tween 20, 0.1% (vol/vol)) and quickly sonicating the solution resulted in the most precise measurement of density for the glitter particles. The average density measurement obtained for each glitter sample was similar, independent of the solution conditions (e.g., the addition of detergent, sonication of the sample). The standard deviations for the glitter samples, however, were larger when detergent was not added and the sample was not sonicated.

The presence of tightly adhered particles (e.g., dust, grit, etc.) whose densities are different than the sample of interest will lead to an inaccurate density measurement.

Careful preparation methods, in which the sample is cleaned but not altered, are needed to ensure that unwanted materials are removed from the sample. We have shown that the removal of nail polish from a glitter sample (via a simple extraction process with acetone and filtration step) does not alter its density. Similar preparation processes can be implemented for other samples. The practice of carefully preparing and analyzing samples of interest is an integral part of forensic science and quantitative analytical chemical methods.

# Conclusions.

MagLev is a convenient and low-cost means for accurately determining the density (with a resolution of 0.001 g/cm 3 ) of a diamagnetic object. The density of an object can be determined from its levitation height in the MagLev device. The density values obtained from a sample, when compared with known density standards, are not dependent on the MagLev device used. Thus, any forensic laboratory using MagLev could contribute to a generally available database and also access it for an estimate of how common or rare their sample might be.

An accurate density determination can aid in determining if a questioned sample is, in fact, different from a known sample. We have demonstrated that the density of trace objects, glitter particles and smokeless gunpowder, can be determined with the MagLev system. We have shown that repeated density measurements and prolonged storage of trace objects in aqueous MnCl 2 does not affect their density. We show that trace objects found in commercial cosmetic products can be extracted and their densities analyzed. We show that density measurements can differentiate glitter particles that are similar in appearance.      

