# Introduction

Local ow rate measurements on different uidic channels are needed for various micro uidic applications. With ow rate sensing, one can control nutrient and cell concentrations in microscale chambers, ( Wu et al. 2008; Mehling and Tay 2014) modify cellular adhesion rates on a substrate, ( Christ and Turner 2010) and sort particles of different sizes. ( Zhou et al. 2019) In organ-on-a-chip systems, cells need to be supplied with an optimal ux of nutrients to maintain their vitality. ( Harink et al. 2013) Furthermore, nely controlled doses of drugs should be administered to test the response of cells from tumor biopsies. ( Stevens et al. 2016;Cetin et al. 2017) In digital micro uidics, droplets with wellcontrolled sizes and compositions can only be generated by an exquisite and local control of different ow rates. ( Ward et al. 2005; Garstecki et al. 2006;Glawdel et al. 2012) In most biomedical reactors, syringe or peristaltic pumps are used to set the ow rates; however, these devices have inherent delays and uctuations that negatively affect the controllability of platforms. Commercial ow sensors are readily available, but naturally they are not integrated at the chip scale, impeding their utility for local ow sensing. Robust on-chip ow sensors appear to be the most e cient solution for ow rate measurements for microchannels. Thermal ow sensors do not require any moving parts and are relatively easy to fabricate. However, their operation depends critically on the knowledge of the heat capacity of the uid, and their accuracy is degraded when the composition of uid is complex whereby unaccounted channels for heat transfer arise. This dependency could create problems for application where ow composition changes over time.

Coriolis owmeters work by detecting the force perpendicular to the ow direction through an oscillating channel. ( Enoksson et al. 1997;Haneveld et al. 2010) The higher complexity and cost of these sensors are compensated by the larger dynamic ranges they provide. Small uidic channel diameters and induced heat on the uid are regarded as the main shortcomings of active owmeters.

In passive ow sensing, capacitive sensors, ( Oosterbroek et al. 1999 Attia et al. 2009) were used to measure the drag force in micro uidics channels. A cantilever-based sensor with variable-sized holes was manufactured and ow rate changes were correlated with cantilever de ection. ( Noeth et al. 2014) This sensor worked by passing the uid through a perforated cantilever structure: the de ection of the cantilever was then used to quantify the ow rate. While this system achieved 1 nL/min sensitivity, the ow needs to pass through the perforated mechanical structure.

Numerous types of electrical ow sensors operating in the radio frequency have been reported. (  non-contact ow rate sensor that exploits the de ection of a thin polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) layer and measured this de ection using a microwave sensor placed in close proximity. This sensor has reached a sensitivity of 0.5 µL/min, however the relaxation timescale of the elastomeric PDMS layer resulted in long recovery times (several minutes).

In this work, we investigated the deformations of a 220 nm Silicon Nitride membrane forming part of a micro uidic channel to achieve ow rate sensing (Fig. 1a). We chose Silicon Nitride owing to its desirable mechanical qualities compared to elastomers such as PDMS; this way, we expected to build a robust yet compliant sensor. The ceramic nature of the membrane increases the sensor durability and enhances its mechanical qualities, such as the ability to measure either liquid or gas ow through the same micro uidic channel and reaching fast mechanical recovery rates. The deformations of the membrane are probed by microwave electrodes directly placed on the membrane as described below. The interaction of uid ow with a membrane can result in nonlinear effects, such as oscillations under constant ow as reported optically in various systems before. 

## Experiments

We fabricated ow sensors by fabricating a coplanar wave guide (CPW) microwave resonator overlapping with a 220 nm thick membrane (Fig. 1). The microwave resonator can be modeled as an RLC circuit where the capacitance is determined by the distance between the signal and ground electrodes. In the case of the CPW geometry used in this work, the gap between the signal and ground electrodes was 400 µm which narrows down to 20 µm on the membrane, de ning an active sensing region which overlaps with the thin membrane (Fig. 1b). When uid ow deforms the thin membrane, the distance between the two electrodes changes, which induces a change in the capacitance -and consequently the resonance frequency-of the microwave resonator. The changes in the resonance frequency can be tracked by a custom electronic circuit based on phase-locked loops. ( Kelleci et al. 2018) The experimental setup consisted of two major subsystems: a micro uidic ow controller and an electronic measurement system (Fig. 1). The chip was placed under a microscope stage to directly observe the mechanical deformations of the membrane. To fabricate the device (Fig. 1b), we began with a commercially available wafer, consisting of 500 µm Si substrate, a 2 µm SiO2 middle layer and a 220 nm Silicon Nitride top layer. The topmost Silicon Nitride eventually formed the membrane of interest (Figure S1a). Photolithography was performed on the backside of the wafer to de ne an etch window.

The window was etched via inductively coupled plasma (Figure S1b) and left overnight in KOH wet etching (Figure S1c). KOH etched through Si and SiO2, and a 220 nm thick membrane formed on the front surface. Sensors with different membrane sizes were utilized to monitor ne and coarse ow rates.

The typical dimensions for the fabricated membrane are approximately 600-1500 µm in length and 300-500 µm in width.

Gold paths for de ning the CPW microwave resonator were patterned on the front side of the wafer.

Photolithography was performed with a mask aligned with respect to the thin lm membrane (Figure S1d). Then, a 100 nm gold layer was deposited to form the signal and ground electrodes (Figure S1e).

Coplanar waveguide resonator was designed to have a 50 Ω impedance to match the impedance of the electronic measurement system.

To fabricate the micro uidic channel, a negative photoresist (SU-8, Sigma-Aldrich) was used to fabricate the molds. Cured PDMS (ratio 10:1) was poured onto these molds and left to bake at 80 o C. Microchannels, typically having dimensions of 300 µm in width and 150 µm in depth, were peeled off from the mold. Through plasma cleaning process, the micro channels were bonded on top of the chip and aligned with the membrane and gold electrodes (Figure S1f). DI water was driven by a controllable pressure pump (MFCS-EZ, Fluigent) and passed through a commercial, thermal ow sensor (FRP, Fluigent) before reaching the micro uidic channel on the chip. The commercial ow sensor has a 430 µm ID borosilicate capillary and measures the ow rate by combining two different temperature readings obtained from two different locations inside the capillary. In between these two temperature sensors, there is a micro heater, and the ow rate value is calculated by the dissipation of the heat. The range of this commercial sensor, calibrated with water, is 0-120 µL/min, with an accuracy of 5% above 2.4 µL/min and a 0.12 µL/min deviation below 2.4 µL/min. PTFE tubes were used to deliver the DI water to the micro channel.

Data acquisition was conducted with a custom-built LabVIEW program where the electronic data and ow rate values from a commercial sensor were simultaneously recorded every 50 msec. To increase the sensitivity of the microwave sensor, we utilized a narrow-band detection scheme which was centered around the rst resonance frequency of the CPW structure. Phase-sensitive detection was performed with a lock-in ampli er (Zurich Instruments, MFLI). Due to the upper frequency limitation of the lock-in ampli er, we constructed an external heterodyne circuitry ( Ferrier et S2). With a phase-locked loop (PLL), the phase of the resonator was locked to 0 degrees with a PI controller.( Kelleci et al.) Any deviation from 0 degrees emerged as an error signal, updating the frequency of the signal generator. With this method, we could effectively keep track of the shifts in the resonance.

# Flow Rate Sensing by Membrane Deformation

In the rst experiments, we measured the shift in the resonance frequency of the microwave sensor as a function of ow rate. We investigated the response of the device from the reset condition (where there was no uid ow) to the target ow rate while monitoring the resonance frequency of the microwave sensor (Fig. 2). When the ow rate reached a target value, sharp upward shifts in the resonance were observed. Each of these shifts depended on the magnitude of the ow rate (Fig. 2b), indicating that the amount of frequency shift can be used as a sensing parameter for the target ow rate.

The baseline frequency uctuations were about ~ 1 kHz, from which one can extrapolate a short-term sensitivity level of 0.5 µL/min. However, as shown with the error bars of Fig. 2b, repeating the experiment at the same ow rate resulted in a dispersion in the frequency shifts with a standard deviation of 5.5 kHz which was larger than the baseline frequency noise. The sensor demonstrated here exhibited a time resolution of only several seconds when the ow rate was increased stepwise (Fig. 2c-d). When the ow was stopped, we observed a downward frequency drift that lasts for approximately 50 seconds (Fig. 2a) however, additional ow rate measurements can still be conducted during recovery period either using successive frequency shifts (Figure S7) or by directly working with the phase shift of the resonator (as in Fig. 2c-d).

After liquid ow rate experiments, we switched to experiments with pressurized air. For the rst air ow experiment, we used a membrane with dimensions of 1.7 mm length and 1 mm width within a channel width of 0.25 mm. The resonance frequency was approximately 2.55 GHz. We spanned the pressure from 20 mbar until 1000 mbar. We have seen an almost linear relationship for the higher-pressure value (Fig. 3a), however, at low pressures the trend deviated from the linear response slightly.

To work at higher air ow rates, another device was fabricated with an increased channel width of 1.3 mm (instead of 0.25 mm, in the previous device). The size of the membrane was 3 x 1 mm and the resonance frequency of the microwave sensor was approximately 2.08 GHz. A monotonically rising frequency response was again observed as the applied pressure increased (Fig. 3b). The experiment also demonstrated that the device with 220 nm Silicon nitride membrane could endure an applied pressure up to 4 bar (Supplementary Video 1 shows the membrane deformation as the pressure is suddenly switched between the reset condition and 4 bar applied pressure).

# Flow Rate Sensing by Membrane Pulsation Period

The interaction of thin membranes with micro uidics channels can result in dynamical bistability: indeed,  Battat et al. 2022) In our experiments at constant liquid ows, we observed periodic deformations of the membrane under optical microscopy as shown in Fig. 4 and Supplementary Video 2. To electronically read out the periodic deformations, the microwave sensor on the thin membrane can be used again as an integrated transducer.

The period of the modulations depends on the uid ow rate as illustrated in Fig. 5. The gure shows the relation between the phase response of the resonator and the effective ow rate. Commercial ow rate sensor was placed in the experimental setup (as in Fig. 1a) to set the ow rate at a constant value. In this way, the desired ow rate values were set within the limit of sensitivity of the ow meter.

In Fig. 5a, two different ow rates, 10 and 5 µL/min, were tested. For a given constant ow rate, the time between two consecutive pulses, called the pulse interval (Ti), remained constant. As the ow rate was set to a different constant value, the pulse interval changed as well. When the ow rate was set to 10 µL/min, pulse interval was approximately 7 seconds, whereas at a 5 µL/min ow rate, pulse interval increased to approximately 14 seconds. Small peaks in the ow rate (as measured by the commercial sensor) were observed after each pulsation (Fig. 5b). Since a de ected membrane results in an enlarged channel, the uidic resistance decreases which in turn results in a temporary increase in the ow rate.

We note that the experiments were conducted without using any components with cyclical mechanisms such as syringe pumps: rather, the ow was induced by pressure driven sources. We also conducted control experiments where commercial ow rate sensor was removed from the system and the uid ow was provided through a vial kept at constant pressure. In this case, where only a constant pressure source drives the ow, we veri ed that membrane pulsations still occur (SI Table 1).

After the initial observations, we used three different device geometries to span different ow rates. To enhance the sensitivity of the resonator, a large membrane (1.5 mm x 0.3 mm) was fabricated and used to resolve the slight increments in the ow rate. The resonance frequency of the microwave sensor coupled to the rst membrane was 3.66 GHz. As shown in Fig. 6 (blue data points), the ow rate was set to an interval of 0-1 µL/min with an incremental change of 0.1 µL/min via the reference sensor. Until 0.3

µL/min, the device did not register any pulsation in the resonance frequency. After reaching a ow rate of 0.4 µL/min, the device began to exhibit discernible pulses. Then, the ow rate increment was changed to 0.5 µL/min and a range of ow rate values were tested until 3.5 µL/min. Blue data points in Fig. 6 indicate an increasing relation between the ow rand the frequency of the pulsation.

A second device -with membrane dimensions of 0.8 mm by 0.35 mm, and a microwave resonance frequency of 2.36 GHz -was used to span a higher ow rate range. We started from 5 µL/min and recorded pulses for 300 seconds at each ow rate value. Then, the ow rate was increased with 5 µL/min steps, reaching a ow rate of 50 µL/min (red data points, Fig. 6). A third device -with membrane dimensions of 3 x 1 mm, and a microwave resonance frequency of 2.08 GHz -was used to operate at higher ow rates. This device could accommodate higher ow rates, since the width of the micro uidic channel was relatively large. Starting with 24 µL/min, we increased the ow rate until 120 µL/min which is the upper limitation of the commercial ow sensor. We kept observing a similar trend whereby the pulsation frequency correlates with the uid ow rate (green data points, Fig. 6).

These results indicate that membrane-integrated microwave sensors can also be used for ow sensing by detecting the period of membrane oscillations. While at high ow rates, the observed pulsations occur frequently resulting in rapid update times for ow monitoring; at low ow rates, the duration between the pulses gets longer. As a result, the update rate of the device is slow for low ow rates, which constitutes a shortcoming of this secondary ow sensing mechanism.

## Conclusion

In conclusion, we demonstrated that thin membranes integrated with microwave resonators can detect ow rates of uids. Fluid ow induces deformations on the membrane, which in turn, modulates the capacitance of a microwave resonator. The capacitance change can be readily measured by tracking the resonance frequency of the microwave resonator. The choice of a sturdy Silicon Nitride membrane as the compliant mechanism enables the measurements of both liquid and gas ow through the same micro uidic architecture. In terms of mechanical transduction of liquid ow, in addition to the expected quasi-static deformation of the membrane, a secondary owrate sensing mechanism emerges whereby steady ow induces periodic pulsations on the thin membrane. The pulsation period of the membrane can be sensitively measured by the changes of the phase response of the microwave sensor. For both sensing mechanisms, the high sensitivity of microwave resonators serves as a potent transducer for probing the interaction dynamics of uid ow and thin membranes.    

### ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors thank John E. Sader and Jesse Collis for helpful discussions. This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement No 758769).

Periodic deformations of the membrane under constant uid pressure. The upper part of the membrane shuttles between different deformations states (full membrane motion can be seen in the Supplementary Video 2). The duration of these transitions depended on the uid ow inside the microchannel. The membrane dimensions are 1.5 mm length, 0.3 mm width, 220 nm thickness. Figure 6 Pulsation frequency as a function of ow rates for different geometries. Three different devices were used in the experiments and their dimensions are provided. In all three experiments, pulsation frequencies were observed to increase monotonically, as the ow rate was increased.

## Supplementary Files

This is a list of supplementary les associated with this preprint. Click to download. FlowSensorSI.pdf SupplementaryVideo1.mp4 SupplementaryVideo2.mp4

