# INTRODUCTION

Explosive growth of data calls for cost effective long-term storage solutions, where tape is an exemplary choice. Today, there are two classes of linear magnetic tape drives: Linear Tape Open (LTO), 1 the format of which is governed by an open standards consortium, and so-called enterprise drives, which have a proprietary format and design. 2 Cartridge capacity for the 7 th generation LTO tape drive (designated LTO7) is 6 TB (∼4 Gb/in 2 ), and until recently, the largest enterprise tape cartridge capacity was 10 TB (∼7 Gb/in 2 ). 3 Read transducers in these products are based on the giant magnetoresistive (GMR) effect. Modern tape recording media uses barium ferrite (BaFe) particles having random orientation.

The 2015 Information Storage Industry Consortium (INSIC) 10-year magnetic tape roadmap 4 shows areal density, and similarly cartridge capacity, growing at >30% per year (2-3x the current rate for hdd). For this to happen, tape track pitch must continue to decrease. 1.5 um GMR read sensors may provide enough output when new, but allowances for losses due to wear and tear must be budgeted into the operating point. TMR is needed for reader widths less than ∼1.5um. Testing in IBM showed that first-generation tape TMRs provide >3x greater output compared to GMR and exhibit small signal losses with use. It was also found that TMR's for tape provide exceptional magnetic stability and capability to operate at significantly lower temperatures than GMR. TMR sensors are deployed for the first time in a tape product, the IBM TS1155 enterprise tape drive, which supports a cartridge capacity of 15TB (∼10 Gb/in 2 ).

This paper begins with a discussion of recording head construction (see Ref. 5 for overview of tape heads), and then describes read and write transducer physical and magnetic aspects. Data showing that reliable operation is achieved are provided. This concludes with an outlook for future scaling of tape systems.

# HEAD CONSTRUCTION, DATA RATE AND TAPE FORMAT

Standard now for LTO and enterprise tape drives is a recording head assembly having reading and writing functions built into separate components ('modules'). The assemblies are comprised of a center reader module plus two outboard writer modules, one on each side of the reader at a read-to-write transducer spacing of 0.9 mm. The reader module read verifies data as it is being written for both tape motion directions. Each writer writes in only one direction of tape motion. 6 Data is compressed, encrypted and recorded to tape, and then read and decrypted and decompressed for verification on the fly. A shift from 2-modules having piggy-back read-write heads to the 3-module construction facilitated the transition from 16 to 32 channels, the standard for today's drives. 32 concurrent channels support data rates of up to 360 MB/sec (TS1155 tape drive).

Each 32-channel module contains 33 data transducers: 15 in the space between the 16 original channels plus one on each end of the array for symmetry. Pitch between transducers is 83.25 um, ½ the 16-channel pitch. This preserves backward read and write capability, a key feature of tape recording systems. Reader and writer modules additionally each contain two dedicated servo-pattern read sensors ('servo readers'), which flank the data element arrays. The servo readers read factoryformatted tracks which contain chevron patterns of the timing-based servo. This information is used for fine-positioning the heads during writing and during read back. The span between servo reader elements is 2859 um, approximating the centerline pitch (2.8588 um) of the 5 servo tracks, which bracket the 4 'databands.' This pitch is unchanged from LTO1 (ca 2000). In a full-file write, each databand is filled by multiple round-trip passes of the tape. For each pass, the head is indexed one shingled track pitch. The space between adjacent transducers in the head defines a sub-databand. The number of tracks in each sub-databand is track pitch times number of passes (minus accommodation for directional buffers, which ensure data is not overwritten).

## TMR SENSOR DESIGN AND FABRICATION

TMR sensors for magnetic recording originally were created, developed and deployed in hdd's. Tape engineers did not have to repeat this but rather figure out how to adapt and deploy the hdd technology. One might expect hdd and tape TMR sensors would be similar. However, sensors for these platforms are surprisingly dissimilar, due to several factors, including operating point differences and the fact that tape heads run in contact with the media. 7 Table I shows dimensions and other details for reading and writing transducers for the 15 TB head, and where appropriate, for an hdd head supporting a 10 TB disk drive.  Note that tape sensor length and width are >10x larger than for hdd, and the tape sensor tunnel barrier area is >400x. This is shown schematically in Figure 1a. Figure 1b further illustrates the differences as viewed from the media bearing surface. Note that the tape shield-to-shield spacing is ∼3x larger than for hdd.

Tape sensors have resistances typically in a range of 25 to 150 Ω for optimal signal processing. Larger tunnel area for tape sensors means that a higher resistance -area product, or 'RA,' is required. For example, a 1.0 by 0.4 um 75 Ω tape sensor has an RA of ∼30 Ω-um 2 . By contrast, in hdd applications, 75 Ω could only be achieved with an unrealizable RA of 0.07 Ω-um 2 . Given a practical lower limit for RA of ∼0.5 Ω-um 2 (defect density driven), hdd technology has resorted to adjusting signal processing electronics to accept resistances in the range of ∼500 Ω or higher. Higher RA for tape is achieved by thicker MgO barriers, which in turn provide enhanced reliability and consistency compared to the hdd design space. For RA in a range of 30 -50 Ω-um 2 , the incidence of barrier defects does not significantly affect die yield. This is important, given that the total tunnel area that is >15,000 times greater than for an hdd slider. And as mentioned, all 35 TMR sensors in a reader module must be functional. Susceptibility to damage due to elevated voltages was studied. It was determined that sensors intentionally subjected to voltage overstress, even if internally shorted, continued to perform with little or no change in signal-to-noise ratio. Thus, while tape sensors have larger tunnel areas, they will have correspondingly larger RAs, leading to robust tunnel barriers. TMR sensors are thus ideal candidates for tape.

A challenge for tape was producing 33 magnetically stable, fully-functional data sensors plus 2 servo sensors in the tape head die. Tape TMRs are longitudinally biased using hard magnets, which serve to establish and maintain a single-domain, or at least stable multi-domain, free layer. Finite element modeling (FEM) of a 1 um sensor shows that longitudinal biasing fields penetrate less than ∼ two gap lengths, or less than ∼ 180 nm, from the ends due to flux leakage into the shields. By comparison, in an hdd sensor stabilization fields have an influence over the entire sensor width. Figure 2 is an example of 2T signal read back by an early TMR tape sensor exhibiting magnetic instability. The jumps in the 2T signal baseline are due to step changes in sensor resistance, as may be caused by unstable domains. Note that the frequency of shifts increases as sense current is increased, and then falls off again at higher currents. FEM shows that the current dependency may be due to internal fields.

Figure 3 is a Magnetic Scanning Microscopy (MSM) of another unstable track in an early sensor. This image shows that the response fluctuations are confined to an edge of the sensor near the hard bias. Typically, this creates noise and so causes a decrease in SNR. This can also be sense current dependent.

Magnetic stability for tape sensors was achieved by increasing the stabilizing field strength and by adjusting thickness and other characteristics of the hard bias magnets. Figure 4  sense current for each of 33 sensors in a new generation head. SNR is consistent from track-to-track and is not strongly current dependent. Stability may be further enhanced by reducing the stripe height to less than 2x the track width. This creates a demagnetizing field that adds to the stabilization field and so increases the likelihood for creating a single domain state in the free layer. Note that this is not a viable strategy for modern hdd sensors, as this would increase tunnel barrier resistance even more.

FIG. 4. SNR (dB) versus sense current for the 33 sensors in a production read module. Current range is from 1 to 4 milliamperes in 8 steps. Forward tape motion tracks 1 -32 (red). Reverse tape motion tracks 2 -33 (blue). Vertical scale is 1 dB per division.

For acceptable TMR die yield, i.e. 35 devices all fully functional, machining processes improvements beyond GMR methods were required. For example, small-particle lapping slurry and kinematics optimizations were needed to achieve a surface finish, in which residual scratch depth is less than approximately 5nm. This is necessary for the TMR geometry, where a single smear from lapping can potentially bridge the MgO barrier and cause a large electrical short. Furthermore, after lapping, row bars are subjected to ion-milling prior to sputter deposition of alumina coating. This aids in removing residual smears and prepares the sensors for operation with tape (discussed in HEAD-TAPE INTERFACE). The authors found that a unique grazing angle (73 o -77 o relative to normal) ion-milling process 8 helped establish resistance uniformity across the all the elements in a die, as determined by comparing nearest neighbor resistances for example.

# WRITE TRANSDUCER: HIGH MOMENT LINER AND TRIMMING

Writer modules each contain 33 writing transducers, which are a classic inductive, longitudinal design, each having two 7-turn coil layers, for a total of 14 turns (note, versus only ∼3 turns for hdd). The turns are necessary for limiting current and temperature rise of the writer module, as all 32 writers in the die write concurrently. While hdd heads have adopted a beak structure to enable perpendicular writing, longitudinal heads are expected to be used for next generation oriented BaFe media. New for the 15 TB write transducer (Table I) is a high-moment CoFeNi alloy seed layer, which is sputtered deposited onto write gap alumina prior to plating the top (trailing edge) pole. Even though the bulk pole is conventional 1.6 T 45/55 nickel iron, the 2.2 T seed layer optimally helps sharpen the write transitions. This was confirmed by FEM of write fields. This showed that providing high moment films on both poles was only slightly better than having only the trailing pole liner.

New for the 15 TB drive write transducer is improved writer track width definition. This is achieved via a wafer-level ion-milling process, which creates a so-called trimmed, or notched, transducer structure. Trimmed poles produce less side-writing due to fringing between top and bottom writing poles. Figure 5 is a magnetic force microscopy (MFM) image of a 15 TB tape shingle written with a 1.35 um shingled track pitch, and an accompanying scaled SEM of the trimmed write transducer. The high moment liner is also (barely) discernable. Shingling, which has been used in tape since the early days of LTO, enables using wide writers (capable of writing previous generation tracks) for writing narrower new generation tracks. With or without shingling, as track widths become smaller, controlling side-writing becomes even more critical, and trimming addresses this. In addition, future heads may adopt smaller write gaps, which also helps address side-writing. 

# HEAD-TAPE INTERFACE, OPERATING POINT AND DURABILITY

TMR sensors for tape, unlike their hdd counterparts, run in continual contact with the media. In addition, a drive can see many tapes and different types of tapes, e.g. JC, JD, etc. Modern tapes have several advantages over the previous generation metal particle tapes: smaller particles (improved SNR); thinner and smoother coatings (enable increasing linear density). Smooth surfaces provided by BaFe tape are a requirement for TMR. Further, for TMR to run reliably, a combination of prerecession (10-12 nm) and crystalline alumina coating (15-17 nm thick) was developed. 9 Figure 6 is a TEM of the shields, gap and alumina coating of a TMR sensor. Crystal structure in the alumina coating may be seen. Recession and coating add ∼ 20 -30 nm to head-media spacing, and this results in Wallace spacing losses. However, TMR output is ∼ 2 millivolts per milliampere of sense current, and this is well above noise sources in the drive. Equalizing the spacing loss is achievable without significantly degrading channel SNR.

Without prerecession and coating, heads are vulnerable to surface damage caused by media particulate defects. A manifestation of damage is a reduction in TMR resistance. Figure 7 shows damage to a TMR sensor caused by a media defect. The arrow indicates the direction of motion of the defect, which passed directly through the sensor, and again on subsequent (shingled) pass, this time through the upper hard bias magnet. As with shorting due to overstress, shorting due to scratching causes output to drop but does not cause spurious increases in sensor noise. Output losses due to shorting were found to be at least partially compensated by an increase of sense current. Increasing sense current may be sufficient to enable a damaged track to continue operating. For this reason, voltage sensing is preferred for TMR tape heads. Today, media vendors strive to ensure that the tape is free of large defects, making damage events an infrequent occurrence with new generation BaFe.

An initiative has been to minimize spacing between writer pole tips and tape. This is feasible because writer and reader modules may use different fabrication methods. Accordingly, a writer module pre-recession process was developed specifically for protecting the servo reading elements, while at the same time not causing write poles to become recessed relative to the AlTiC tape-supporting surfaces. 10 In addition, to minimize effects of tribocharging, which itself may depend on environment and media type and usage, writer poles are electrically connected to the conductive AlTiC substrate via resistive shunts internal to the wafer. The novel tape bearing surface not only protects the head the transducers in this environment of continual contact, but also reduces both static and dynamic friction. 6 For the 15 TB cartridge tape drive, TMR data sensors are 1 um wide and have a shield-to-shield spacing of 90 nm. Write transducer poles are 2.85 um wide, and trimmed, and have a 150 nm write gap and 100 nm thick 2.2 T CoFeNi magnetic alloy liner under the top (trailing edge) pole. These features, in conjunction with high bandwidth track-following capability, support a shingled track width of 1.35 um, or 18 ktpi, at liner density of 510 kbpi on non-oriented second generation BaFe media. This provides an areal density of approximately 10 Gbit/in 2 . Note that this tape sensor is ∼30x wider and 3x shorter gap-wise than a modern hdd sensor, suggesting that tape areal density should be roughly 90x less than for hdd. Actual values support this (10 vs 1000 Gb/in 2 ). However, cartridge capacities are often a little higher than current generation hdd capacity. This is due to denser tape packing compared to disk: tape media thickness is ∼5um, which is ∼100 times smaller than disk platter-surfaces pitch of ∼0.5 to 1 mm.

Testing on early heads having TMR sensors and advanced writers showed that TMRs are stable and show little change during running in contact with BaFe media. Figure 8 is a plot of average 2T/8T resolution, which is a measure of head-tape spacing, for each full write pass in a prototype TMR tape drive running JD media for an extended period. Linear density is 540 kbpi and cartridge FIG. 8. Median resolution at 540 kbpi versus full file pass for 13 JD tape cartridges, each completing 100 full file writes. Data is for a prototype tape drive having an early TMR head. Data are shown for forward (red) and reverse (blue) tape motion directions. capacity is 10.8 TB. Each tape is fully written 100 times. The HTI is identical to that of the TS1155 tape drive. This drive has written a total of 13.6 PB and continues to run. Resolution and thus spacing is maintained over the duration of the test. The drive runs at full capacity and with no discernable changes in TMR resistances.

## FUTURE SCALING

Table II provides a comparison of future trends for tape and hdd. Tape advances depend upon advances in the media with respect to SNR and spacing (smaller particles, better dispersion, perpendicular orientation), and advances in track-following capabilities to enable smaller track pitches. Unlike hdd, tape is not facing superparamagnetic limit challenges. The areal density demonstration in IBM's Zurich Research Laboratory showed 201 Gbits/in 2 on Pt-based sputtered media and the write head technology used in the 15 TB cartridge drive. 11 Tests for determining bit error rates as a function of linear density using JD media and a TS1155 drive equipped with a standard 1 um TMR sensor show that higher linear density is within reach even with current JD media and the current heads.

