# DESCRIPTION

## BACKGROUND

In any particular geographic area, whether aquatic or land, it is often desirable to determine in a population of plants the genotype of those plants. A particular challenge is when in a population of plants there exists more than one species of a genus of the plant, where one or more species has a characteristic distinct from the other, yet is morphologically indistict. An example of such a situation is where within a population of plants, the wild type species is inter-planted with another species that is more aggressive, more resistant to herbicide application, or has another undesirable characteristic. This is complicated further when the species interbreed, producing a hybrid.

An example is watermilfoil plants of the genus Myriophyllum. The invasive aquatic plant Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum L.) readily hybridizes with the related North American native species northern watermilfoil (M. sibiricum Kom.). Hybrid watermilfoil (M. spicatum×M. sibiricum) populations have higher fitness and reduced sensitivity to some commonly used herbicides, making management more difficult. There is growing concern that management practices using herbicides with mixed populations such as watermilfoil species may further select for hybrid individuals due to the difference in herbicide sensitivity. Accurate and cost-effective identification of hybrid individuals within populations is therefore critical for management decisions.

Still another example are the land plants of the genus Amaranthus. Palmer amaranth (Amaranthus palmeri) and waterhemp (Amaranthus tuberculatus) are important weed species that can contaminate seeds for sale (e.g., wildflowers, native grasses). Palmer amaranth has been listed as a prohibited noxious weed species in some US states, meaning that a seed lot containing Palmer amaranth may not legally be sold. Waterhemp is prohibited from seeds for sale in Canada and China. Waterhemp and Palmer amaranth seeds cannot be distinguished visually from other, non-noxious Amaranthus species, such as redroot pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus), smooth pigweed (Amaranthus hybridus), and spiny amaranth (Amaranthus spinosus). There is no fast and inexpensive method for the seed testing industry to reliably assess bulked amaranth seed samples as containing Palmer amaranth or not. Therefore, the seed production and analysis industry has considerable interest in a DNA-based test to identify the presence of any Palmer amaranth and waterhemp seeds.

## SUMMARY

A method for determining the genotype of a population of plants is provided with a system using at least three primers, a first primer recognizing a target sequence specific to a species of the plant genus of interest, a second primer recognizing a target in the second species, and a third primer recognizing a third target sequence in both the first and second species or group of species. Under proper amplification conditions, a DNA-containing sample produces a measurable signal that allows the sample to be sample determined as a member of the first or second species, a mixture of the species, or a hybrid. Multiple species may be determined in this manner. The process provides for fast identification of a large number of samples such that the population of plants can be genotyped. In one example, proper application of appropriate herbicide or other control measures to the population may be more accurately determined as a result of such genotyping. In an embodiment, the process is repeated three times with different target sequences and the results analyzed to produce increased accuracy of genotyping. Another embodiment provides for a control for comparison of results by transforming bacteria with one of the target sequences, or a 1:1 mixture of the two target sequences, contacting the plasmids with the primers to produce a measurable signal for control measurements.

## DESCRIPTION

Provided here are methods of genotyping a population of plants using high throughput methodology that is capable of distinguishing one species of genus or group of species from another and further can distinguish plants that are a hybrid of species within a genus. With the methods described here hundreds and thousands of plants may be screened in a day and at a cost that is 1/10 the cost of present processes (in one instance costing less than $10 whereas genotyping with RFLP is approximately $20-$30 per sample). The reduction in cost compared to RFLP identification methods can be one times, two times, ten times, three times, four times, five times, six times, seven times, eight times, nine times, ten times or more less than RFLP process. The methods are especially useful where analyzing a population of plants, and, in particular, invasive weedy plants, in order to select the most efficient means of eradication of the invasive plant.

When referring to genotyping plants is meant to include genotyping a population of plants, plant parts, tissue or seed. The DNA sample may be obtained in any convenient matter, as from any tissue, callus, organ or plant part for example. The term plant or plant material or plant part is used broadly herein to include any plant at any stage of development, or to part of a plant, including a plant cutting, a plant cell, a plant cell culture, a plant organ, a plant seed, and a plantlet. A plant cell is the structural and physiological unit of the plant, comprising a protoplast and a cell wall. A plant cell can be in the form of an isolated single cell or aggregate of cells such as a friable callus, or a cultured cell, or can be part of a higher organized unit, for example, a plant tissue, plant organ, or plant. Thus, a plant cell can be a protoplast, a gamete producing cell, or a cell or collection of cells that can regenerate into a whole plant. As such, a seed, which comprises multiple plant cells and is capable of regenerating into a whole plant, is considered a plant cell for purposes of this disclosure. A plant tissue or plant organ can be a seed, protoplast, callus, or any other groups of plant cells that is organized into a structural or functional unit. Particularly useful parts of a plant include harvestable parts and parts useful for propagation of progeny plants. A harvestable part of a plant can be any useful part of a plant, for example, flowers, pollen, seedlings, tubers, leaves, stems, fruit, seeds, roots, and the like. A part of a plant useful for propagation includes, for example, seeds, fruits, cuttings, seedlings, tubers, rootstocks, and the like. The tissue culture will preferably be capable of regenerating plants.

In one example described in more detail below, the invasive aquatic plant of the Myriophyllum genus damages aquatic environments by outcompeting native plants and forming mats that damage other beneficial vegetation. Two species include Myriophyllum sibiricum, and the aggressive Myriophyllum spicatum. Hybrids of the two species are considerably less susceptible to herbicide and thus pose a particular environmental concern. Additional challenges are that the invasive and native plants are phenotypically the same and hybridization blurs the ability to identify variations. Currently, PCR-RFLP is used to distinguish one species from another.

A still further example is Palmer amaranth (Amaranthus palmeri) and waterhemp (Amaranthus tuberculatus), important weed species that can contaminate seeds for sale (e.g., wildflowers, native grasses). Palmer amaranth has been listed as a prohibited noxious weed species in some US states, meaning that a seed lot containing Palmer amaranth may not legally be sold. Waterhemp is prohibited from seeds for sale in Canada. Waterhemp and Palmer amaranth seeds cannot be distinguished visually from other, non-noxious Amaranthus species, such as redroot pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus), smooth pigweed (Amaranthus hybridus), and spiny amaranth (Amaranthus spinosus).

The process described here uses Kompetitive Allele Specific PCR, also known as a KASP™ assay. It is based on competitive allele-specific PCR and allows scoring of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), as well as deletions and insertions at specific loci. Two allele specific forward primers are used having the target SNP at the 3′ end and a common reverse primer is used for both. The primers have a unique “tail” sequence (reporter nucleotide sequence) compatible with a different fluorescent reporter (reporter molecule). The primers are contacted with the sample along with a mix which includes a universal Fluorescence Resonant Energy Transfer (FRET) cassette and Taq polymerase. During rounds of PCR cycling, the tail sequences allow the FRET cassette to bind to the DNA and emit fluorescence. See, e.g. Yan et al. “Introduction of high throughput and cost effective SNP genotyping platforms in soybean” Plant Genetics, Genomic and Biotechnology 2(1): 90-94 (2014); Semagn et al. “Single nucleotide polymorphism genotyping using Kompetitive Allele Specific PCR (KASP): overview of the technology and its application in crop improvement” Molecular Breeding 33(1): 1-14 (2013). In the present process, emission of one fluorescent signal (reporter molecule) or the other indicates the plant is one of the two species, where presence of both signals indicates a hybrid. Examples here show use of 6-carboxyflurescein (FAM); and 6-carboxy-2′,4,4′,5′,7,7′-hexachlorofluorescein (HEX) fluorophores, however any convenient means of producing a measurable signal may be used. Examples without intending to be limiting include tetrachlorofluorescein (TET); cyan florescent protein, yellow fluorescent protein, luciferase, SyBR Green I; ViC; CAL Fluor Gold 540, ROX Texas Red; CAL Fluor Red 610; CYS; Quasar 670; Quasar 705; and Fret.

In sum, a first primer is produced recognizing a first target nucleotide sequence in the genome of a first species, a second primer is produced recognizing a second target nucleotide sequence of a second species and the third common reverse primer universal to all genotypes allows for amplification. A “tail” reporter sequence is provided with the primer. The expression cassette comprises sequences complementary to the reporter sequence. With rounds of PCR, the cassette is no longer quenched and a measurable signal is produced.

Further variations for identifying weedy species can be employed. In an embodiment, a noxious or weed species may be identified by a first primer as above, specific to the weedy species, and a first tail reporter sequence (such as FAM, for example), and a second primer common to other non-weedy species and a different tail (such as HEX) may be used to determine if a weedy species is present.

The process further can employ additional primers that recognize target sequence of a third, fourth or additional species of the genus. The process adds one or more primers which each have a “tail” reporter sequence, the expression cassette comprises sequences complementary to the reporter sequence and when bound produces an additional different reporter molecule. The method thus can further comprise at least one additional primer recognizing a target nucleotide sequence in the genome of said plant genus specific to a species other than the first or second species and further comprising a reporter sequence other than the first or second reporter sequence, the third primer recognizing a target nucleotide sequence in the genome of said first species, second species and said species other than said first or second species, and where the expression cassette includes a sequence complementary to the sequence other than said first or second reporter sequence and a sequence encoding a reporter molecule and determining if said sample DNA comprises DNA of said first species, second species, species other than said first or said species, or a hybrid of any of said species.

In the present process KASP™ assays are employed for genotyping a large population of plants and in an embodiment a population of weedy plants which can be invasive plants, or any plants that grow where they are not desired, and plants that need to be eradicated as a group. By using the assay, it is possible to obtain a DNA sample for a large number of plants in a population, determine which species they are, and if they are hybrid, and adjust eradication methods for optimum use with the plant population. By way of example without limitation, a 96 well plate can be used to analyze 90 plants using six wells for control, for an improved determination of the predominate genotype of a plant population. In another example, 1500 plants can be analyzed with 35 controls, allowing for even large sampling of a population. Rather than each well subject to a different assay, an individual plant is assayed in each well. Using these methods, as demonstrated below, the ability to detect variation within a population is increased. In one example, 36 individual plants were assayed, only one of which was a hybrid.

In an embodiment, the assay provides for an improved control for measuring results of the KASP™ assay. Typically, a control plant is grown in hydroponic culture to serve as a control. Here, DNA is cloned, placed in an E. coli vector and introduced into E. coli for amplification. Each different species may be introduced into E. coli. The DNA may be extracted from the E. coli for use as a control. Where a hybrid control is to be produced, the two plasmids with DNA of each species are mixed at a ratio of 1:1. The result is a less expensive, less time consuming control that does not require greenhouse conditions or tissue culture.

In a further embodiment the control consists of a mixture of plant tissue, such as plant seeds. The seeds are a collection of different species of a plant genus, provided in known ratios dependent upon the detection limit that is useful for a particular population. In one example, set forth in more detail below, Palmer amaranth seeds were mixed with redroot pigweed in ratios that provided, there Palmer amaranth seeds were mixed with redroot pigweed in ratios of 10:0, 8:2, 6:4, 4:6, 2:8, and 0:10. The specific ratios will vary depending upon the mix of species expected and at the level of detection desired. In a still further embodiment, plasmids may be used as controls, as discussed above, where a plasmid is provided for each species to be detected, as referred to above.

Still another embodiment provides for increased efficacy by performing the KASP assay at three distinct loci. The inventors have found that when they perform the assay on three loci with different SNPs, each using its own set of primers, and combine the results in discriminate analysis, up to 100% accuracy is obtained. For example, discriminant analysis is used to predict which species a plant belongs to (a categorical variable) by the observed (continuous) fluorescence values. When a single SNP is used, the separation between the different fluorescence values for species one, species two, and the hybrid may be clear leading to 100% likelihood of the individual plant belonging to the group it is assigned to by discriminant analysis. However, for some SNPs, the separation between the different fluorescence values is less clear, leading to a less than 100% likelihood of the group assignment being correct (although usually the likelihood is still over 90%). When multiple SNPs are tested in the same plant, discriminant analysis can be performed on all the fluorescence values obtained from the different assays. Since a plant can only belong to one of the three groups (species one, species two, or hybrid), the combination of information from the different SNPs leads to a higher probability that the assignment is correct.

The primers recognize target sequences which distinguish one species of the genus of plant from another species or group of species. Below an example is provided of the Internal Transcribed Spacer region which is useful in identifying one species of watermilfoil or Amaranthus from another. Any target sequence in a plant genus may be used where a polymorphism distinguishes between species of plants. Thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms have been identified over the years that distinguish plant species and a skilled person may select from the many nucleic acid sequences or SNPs available. For example, thousands of SNPs are available readily through such databases as maizegdb.org; soybase.org.snps; 1001genomes.org (Arabidopsis); and described in many articles such as Maughan et al. (2011) “Development, characterization and linkage mapping of SNPs in grain amaranths” Plant Gen 4:92-101 doi:10/38351/plantgenome2010.12.0027. Any convenient target sequences may be used in the process.

The process in an embodiment is especially useful with weedy, invasive and noxious plant control. Weedy plants are those growing where they are not desired. The USDA maintains a list of federal and state noxious weeds. A noxious weed is defined as a plant that can directly or indirectly injure or cause damage to crops, livestock, poultry or other interest of agriculture, irrigation, navigation, the natural resources of the United States, the public health or the environment. 7 U.S.C. §7702 (12). Examples, without intending to be limiting, of noxious aquatic species are Azolla pinnata Caulerpa taxifolia (Mediterranean strain), Eichhornia azurea, Hydrilla verticillate, Hygrophila polysperma, Ipomoea aquatica, Lagarosiphon major Limnophila sessiliflora, Melaleuca quinquenervia, Monochoria hastate, Monochoria vaginalis, Ottelia alismoides, Sagittaria sagittifolia, Salvinia auriculata, Salvinia biloba, Salvinia herzogii, Salvinia molesta and Solanum tampicense. Examples of land weeds include, without limitation, Acacia nilotica, Ageratina adenophora, Ageratina riparia, Alternanthera sessilis, Amaranthus genus, Arctotheca calendula, Asphodelus fistulosis, Avena sterilis, Carthamus oxyacantha, Chrysopogon aciculatus, Commelina benghalensis, Crupina vulgaris, Digitaria scalarum, Digitaria velutina, Drymaria arenariodes, Emex australis, Emex spinose, Euphorbia terracina, Galega officinalis, Heracleum mantegazzianum, Imperata brasiliensis, Imperata cylindrica, Inula britannica, Ischaemum rugosum, Leptochloa chinensis, Lycium ferocissimum, Lygodium flexuosum, Lygodium microphyllum, Melastoma malabathricum, Mikania cordata, Mikania micrantha, Mimosa invisa, Mimosa pigra, Moraea collina, Moraea flaccida, Moraea miniate, Moraea ochroleuca, Moraea pallida, Nassella trichotoma, Onopordum acaulon, Onopordum Illyricum, Opuntia aurantiaca, Oryza longistaminata, Oryza punctate, Oryza rufipogon, Paspalum scrobiculatum, Pennisetum clandestinum, Pennisetum macrourum, Pennisetum pedicellatum, Pennisetum polystachion, Prosopis genus, Rottboellia cochinchinensis Rubus fruticosis Rubus moluccanus Saccharum spontaneum Sagittaria sagittifolia Salsola vermiculata Senecio inaequidens Senecio madagascariensis, Setaria pumila ssp. pallidefusca (Now: ssp. subtesselata), Solanum torvum Solanum viarum, Spermacoce alata, Tridax procumbens, and Urochloa panicoides.

An embodiment allows the genotyping of a population of watermilfoil aquatic plants, distinguishing between the Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum), Northern watermilfoil (Myriophyllum sibiricum) and hybrids of the two. A further embodiment provides for distinguishing the species and hybrid by identifying a SNP within the nuclear ribosomal Internal Transcribed Spacer Region (ITS) of the plant genome. The ITS region can differentiate nearly all North American watermilfoil species, which are inherited biparentally and thus can be used also to identify hybrids. This region of the genome has been identified by Moody and Les (2007) and is found at GenBank accession numbers AF513849, AF513850, DQ786012-DQ786029. See Moody and Les “Geographic distribution and genotypic composition of invasive hybrid watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum×M. sibiricum) populations in North America” Biol. Invasions 9:559-570 (2007).

Watermilfoil molecular studies are set forth in Sturtevant et al. which also sets forth twenty-three SNPs. Sturtevant et al, “Molecular Characterization of Eurasian Watermilfoil, Northern Milfoil, and the Invasive Interspecific Hybrid in Michigan Lakes” J. Aquat. Plant Manage 47:128-135 (2009). When referring here to digestion at base pair 274 or 551 of the ITS PCR product, is referring to Grafe et al “A PCR-RFLP method to detect hybridization between the invasive Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum) and the native northern watermilfoil (Myriophyllum sibiricum), and its application in Ontario lakes” Botany 93:117-121 (2015). The ITS region was amplified with the universal primers (forward) ITS5 (5′-GGAAGTAAAAGTCGTAACAAGG-3′ (SEQ ID NO: 1)), and (reverse) ITS4 (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′(SEQ ID NO: 2)) (White et al 1990) producing a product of 750 bp. In Grafe et al, the authors aligned sequences obtained to the reference sequence FJ426346.1 (SEQ ID NO: 3), from Sturtevant et al 2009. However, to find the restriction sites, they looked through all the published ITS sequences for M. spicatum and M. sibiricum. In FJ426346, which is M. spicatum, FspI cuts at bp 551. In FJ426352 (SEQ ID NO: 4), which is M. sibiricum, BmtI cuts at bp 274.

The process is useful in determining the best methods for control of a plant population. When a population of plants is determined to have a higher proportion of weed plants and/or more aggressive hybrids, it is possible to adjust control methods for the particular population. More aggressive measures can be taken when the population contains a higher amount of such noxious or invasive species or hybrids. The control methods can reduce growth of a higher number of plants in such instances. After genotyping of the population, control measures may be adjusted. Control methods can reduce growth of undesired plants, can reduce the growth of the entire population, or enhance desired plants. It is useful with any control or eradication measures, whether physical removal, application of biological controls such as insects, fungi, microbes or the like, application of naturally occurring compositions that impact plant growth, chemical applications such as herbicides, or any other convenient method. In one example, once the population of watermilfoil is genotyped, it is possible to adjust eradication methods, and, for example, apply a higher rate of herbicide where the population is predominately hybrid. Methods of control of weeds such as aquatic weeds are well known, such as that discussed at Heilman et al. US20130157857; Mann, US20150218099; Koschnick et al. US20150018213; and Mango US20100273655.

The ability to genotype dozens of individuals provides the ability to identify the presence of rare individuals, such as a less common parental species or the inter-specific hybrid. Land populations and lakes with complex species distribution dynamics, such as low proportion of hybrids, are where herbicide application or choice of herbicide must be carefully made so as not to select for the more vigorous and less herbicide sensitive hybrid individuals. With the ability to genotype hundreds of individuals rapidly and inexpensively using KASP™, weed managers will be able to make more informed decisions about herbicide type and application rates, such as choosing specific herbicides and rate to control hybrid individuals only when they are confirmed to be present. Larger data sets comprised of accurate genotyping data will allow modeling of plants including weedy invasive plants such as Myriophyllum species distribution dynamics, testing the hypothesis that increased selection pressure from herbicide application favors hybrid individuals due to their decreased herbicide sensitivity. In one example, populations can be genotyped using KASP™ both before and after herbicide applications to quantify shifts in species distribution dynamics towards invasive species or hybrid individuals.

The following is provided by way of exemplification without intending to be limiting to the scope of the invention. References cited here are incorporated herein by reference in their entirety.

### EXAMPLES

**Example 1**

The invasive aquatic plant Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum L.) was introduced to the United States from Asia during the 1940s (Couch and Nelson 1988; Moody et al. 2016). After introduction, this submersed species spread rapidly throughout the United States, forming dense monotypic mats that have caused economic and ecological damage to infested lakes, streams, and reservoirs (Eiswerth et al. 2000; Olden and Tamayo 2014). The decrease in native plant diversity that occurs after M. spicatum invasion is an alarming ecological impact (Madsen et al. 1991). Furthermore, it is now apparent that the invasive M. spicatum readily hybridizes with the related North American native species northern watermilfoil (M. sibiricum Kom.) (Grafe et al. 2015; Moody and Les 2007; Zuellig and Thum 2012).

Some hybrid watermilfoil (M. spicatum×M. sibiricum) populations appear to have higher fitness manifested as faster and more aggressive growth rate both in laboratory and field conditions than either parental species, making management more difficult (Hovick and Whitney 2014; LaRue et al. 2013). Additionally, hybrid populations are less sensitive to some commonly used herbicides, including 2,4-D, fluridone, norflurazon, and topramazone (Berger et al. 2015; LaRue et al. 2013). There is growing concern that current management practices in lakes with mixed populations of watermilfoil species, which rely heavily on herbicide application, may further select for hybrid populations due to the difference in herbicide sensitivity.

Several methods to accurately identify M. spicatum, M. sibiricum, and M. spicatum×M. sibiricum hybrid individuals using morphological characteristics have been proposed. Morphological characteristics, while sufficient to distinguish between M. spicatum and M. sibiricum, are no longer reliable once hybrid individuals are present, as the hybrid characteristics are often intermediate between the two species (e.g., the number of pinnae or leaflet pairs) (Coffey and McNabb 1974; Moody and Les 2007).

Sufficient genetic variation exists between the two species that genotyping is an accurate method for species identification (Moody and Les 2002; Sturtevant et al. 2009). Current methods rely on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions ofM. spicatum and M. sibiricum (Moody and Les 2002), using 23 intra-genic polymorphic SNPs in the first and second Internal Transcribed Spacer regions (ITS1 and ITS2). Of these SNPs, 11 clearly distinguish between M. spicatum and M. sibiricum. When a single individual is heterozygous for both alleles of a single SNP, it indicates the individual is an inter-specific hybrid. That individual will also be heterozygous for the remaining 10 SNPs due to linkage of the SNPs within the ITS regions.

SNP genotyping in these species has been performed using several methods. Originally, the ITS region was amplified via polymerase chain reaction (PCR), the PCR products were cloned, and multiple clones were sequenced to determine whether an individual was homozygous or heterozygous at the ITS SNPs (Grafe et al. 2014). This process requires the longest time and highest cost per sample of available methods. Subsequently, genotyping was streamlined with the development of a PCR restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay using either a BmtI or FspI restriction digest that cut at base pair (bp) 274 or 551 of the ITS amplicon, respectively as discussed supra. By eliminating the cloning and sequencing for species identification with the PCR-RFLP assay, Grafe et al. (2014) were able to substantially decrease the amount of time and money per sample required for positive species identification of individual watermilfoil specimens. The higher throughput enabled larger sample sizes per lake, providing a more accurate estimate ofMyriophyllum species distribution dynamics.

Advances in SNP genotyping provide more cost-effective and accurate results than PCR-RFLP. Currently, the Kompetitive Allele Specific PCR (KASP) assay is a common technique for genotyping SNPs. This assay is used in several fields, including plant breeding, disease identification, and species identification (Semagn et al. 2014). KASP is able to discriminate between two alleles of a SNP using a common reverse primer paired with two forward primers, one specific to each allele. Each forward primer also has a nucleotide sequence that hybridizes in one example to either the HEX or FAM fluorophore quencher. Amplification proceeds using stringent conditions to only permit forward primers to bind if they are perfectly complementary to the template sequence. Fluorophores are released from the quencher molecule when a forward primer is incorporated in a PCR product, causing the released fluorophore to fluoresce. This fluorescence is detected at the end of the assay using a real-time PCR machine, and the proportion of fluorescence from HEX, FAM, or both indicates the genotype of the sample.

KASP genotyping has several advantages compared to PCR-RFLP assays. KASP assays are more convenient, as they are both faster and less expensive. Eighty or more individuals can be genotyped simultaneously (in a 96 well plate), giving a much more accurate view of the Myriophyllum species distribution dynamics within a lake, and providing an increased likelihood of detecting a rare hybrid individual. KASP assay design is very flexible, as primer design is not limited to available restriction enzyme recognition sites, and primers can even cover stretches of sequence containing multiple SNPs by incorporating degenerate or mixed bases into the primer sequence. A target sequence thus can be one or more SNPs in an example. KASP assays are quantitative and therefore amenable to statistical analysis, such that probabilities can be assigned to genotyping calls. Data from multiple SNP genotyping assays can be integrated into a single model, increasing the robustness of species diagnostics.

Here we describe KASP assays for three SNPs in the ITS region to genotype individuals from both parental watermilfoil species and their hybrid, using synthesized plasmids containing the respective sequences as positive controls. Using KASP we genotyped dozens of individuals from two lakes, giving a highly accurate picture of Myriophyllum species distribution dynamics in each case. Discriminant analysis showed that while a single SNP was generally sufficient for genotyping an individual, using multiple SNPs increased the reliability of genotyping.

**Materials and Methods**

**Plant Collection**

Several previously identified M. spicatum biotypes and known inter-specific watermilfoil hybrid (M. spicatum×M. sibiricum) biotypes (eight biotypes each) were harvested from aquaponics cultures maintained in the CSU Weed Research lab. Unknown Myriophyllum individuals were collected from two lakes in northern Colorado, Rainbow Lake located at 40.506758,-104.989224 and Walleye Lake at 40.505680,-104.982883. Individual stems (Rainbow, n=23; Walleye, n=16) were collected from each lake by rake throws. A single leaf was used for DNA extraction and therefore a tissue sample is assumed to represent a unique individual. Tissue samples were stored in sealed bags with damp paper towels at 4 C until DNA extraction.

**Plant DNA Extraction**

DNA was extracted from 50 mg of watermilfoil leaf tissue using a modified CTAB method (Doyle 1991). All steps were performed at room temperature (22° C.) unless otherwise indicated. In brief, tissue was initially ground to a fine powder with a metal bead in 500 μL of 2×CTAB buffer (2% CTAB, 1% PVP, TRIS-EDTA pH 5) using a Qiagen TissueLyser at 30 oscillations/second for 1 minute. Ground samples were incubated at 65° C. for 1 hour, after which 500 μL of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1) was added. The samples were slowly rocked on an orbital shaker for 15 minutes. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000×g for 5 minutes. The upper phase was transferred to a new tube, to which 500 μL of chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (24:1) was added. The samples were again centrifuged at 10,000×g for 5 minutes. The upper phase was transferred to a new tube and nucleic acids were precipitated using 0.1 volumes of 3 M sodium acetate and 2.5 volumes of 100% ethanol. Samples were precipitated at 4° C. for 15 minutes and then centrifuged at 15,000×g for 15 minutes. The resulting pellets were re-suspended in 50 μL of sterilized water. DNA concentrations and quality were assessed using a spectrophotometer (NanoDrop 2000 Spectrophotometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Wilmington, Del., USA). Samples were subsequently diluted to 5 ng/μL for use in all KASP assays.

**Plasmid Design**

Two plasmids were designed as positive controls for the KASP assay. Plasmid inserts were comprised of the sequence within the ITS region complementary to the genotyping primers, with all inter-primer sequence removed (FIG. 1). The complete oligonucleotides were synthesized by GenScript in the puc57-Kan plasmid. Below are the sequence of the M. sibiricum and M. spicatum positive plasmid controls.

**Plasmid Sequence**

Control plasmids were transformed into Dh5α E. coli cells using a standard heat transformation protocol (provided by GenScript). First all reagents (plasmid and Dh5α cells) were thawed on ice. Next 1 μL of plasmid at 100 ng/μL was added to the Dh5α cells and mixed gently. The mixture was incubated on ice for 30 minutes and then placed in a hot water bath at 42° C. for 45 sec. Tubes were returned to an ice bath for 2 minutes. Next, 1 mL of liquid LB was added to the E. coli and allowed to incubate at 37° C. for 1 hour. Plates containing LB+Kan (Kan at 50 μg/ml) were pre-warmed to 37° C. during this incubation. Next, 200 μL of the E. coli transformation was added to the warmed LB+Kan plate, spread evenly, and allowed to grow at 37° C. for 16 hr. Individual colonies were transferred to a numbered patch plate and allowed to grow at 37° C. for 16 hr.

E. coli DNA Extraction

DNA was extracted from cultures grown from ten colonies on each patch plate. A toothpick was dipped into the E. coli colony and used to inoculate 1 mL of LB+Kan. After incubating for 16 hours at 37° C. with shaking, the E. coli cultures were pelleted by centrifugation at 8000 rcf. DNA was extracted from the pellets using the standard extraction protocol provided with the Qiagen Miniprep kit. DNA concentrations and quality were assessed using a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer. Extracted plasmids were subsequently diluted to 5 pg/μL for use in all KASP assays. A 1:1 mixture of the diluted plasmids was used in KASP assays to simulate an inter-specific hybrid.

**Primer Design**

Three primer sets were designed for the KASP assay to distinguish three diagnostic SNPs at bp 118, 363, and 478 in the Internally Transcribed Spacer (ITS) region. For each primer set, the forward primer for M. spicatum was assigned the HEX tag while the forward primer for M. sibiricum was assigned the FAM tag. Some primers spanned sequences containing SNPs that discriminate between sub-populations of M. sibiricum, which required the use of degenerate bases in the primers. Primers are shown in Table 1. Degenerate bases are indicated according to the universal code.

**KASP Assay**

A primer master mix including forward and reverse primers for a single SNP was made. All primers were first re-suspended in Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, at 100 μM. Primer mixes were made according to the manufacturer's recommendations (LGC Genomics), with 18 μL of the M. spicatum forward primer, 18 μL of the M. sibiricum forward primer, 45 μL of the common reverse primer, and 69 μL of 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.3. KASP master mixes were made with 432 μL LGC Genomics Master Mix (which includes polymerase, dNTPs, buffer, and HEX- and FAM-tagged oligonucleotides) and 11.88 μL of primer master mix.

KASP reactions were assembled in a 96-well plate with 4 μL of master mix and either 4 μL water (no template control), 4 μL genomic DNA at 5 ng/μL, or 4 μL of plasmid DNA at 5 pg/μL. Reactions were performed in a BioRad CFX Connect according to the following standard KASP PCR program: Activation at 94° C. for 15 minutes, then 10 touchdown cycles of 94° C. for 20 seconds (denaturing), 61-55° C. for 60 seconds (dropping 0.6 C per cycle, for annealing and elongation), 23° C. for 30 seconds (to permit accurate plate reading), followed by 26 cycles of 94 C for 20 seconds, 55° C. for 60 seconds, 23° C. for 30 seconds. Fluorescence was tracked in real-time with plate reads at the end of every amplification cycle. Fluorescence data from the cycle showing the greatest distinction between clusters without any background amplification was used for genotyping, which was determined to be cycles 22-24 of the amplification phase.

**Data Analysis**

Due to slight variations in maximum fluorescence and fluorescence in the no template controls between plates, HEX and FAM fluorescence for each data point were transformed as a percentage of the maximum fluorescence for each fluorophore within a plate. Maximum fluorescence is defined as the highest FAM or HEX signal from any reaction in a 96-well plate. Cutoffs for genotyping calls on unknown samples were drawn by calculating the point halfway between the mean x,y coordinate of the control hybrid and either the control M. sibiricum or M. spicatum clusters, then drawing a line from that point to the origin (0,0). Additionally, a zone of “no amplification” was defined by the maximum fluorescence of no-template controls. A quarter circle around the axis intercept was used to define this zone. Genotypes were assigned to unknown samples based on where in the plot their fluorescence values occurred.

Once all samples (experimental samples as well as controls) were assigned a genotype, linear discriminant analysis was performed in JMP 12.2 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, N.C., USA) to evaluate the probability of an individual having its assigned genotype. Genotyping results from each SNP were first assessed independently, then using all three SNPs combined to provide more robust probabilities.

**Results and Discussion**

We developed three KASP primer sets that distinguish between the native M sibiricum and the invasive M. spicatum species as well as inter-specific hybrids. Our KASP primers utilize the previously identified SNPs at base pairs 118, 363, and 478 of the ITS region (Table 1). We tested the primer sets on plasmids containing known sequences; on known lab biotypes of M. spicatum and hybrids; and on unknown Myriophyllum individuals harvested from two lakes in northern Colorado. We assigned genotypes manually, and then measured the reliability of the genotyping calls using discriminant analysis to assign probabilities to calls from each SNP individually as well as using all three SNPs together.

**KASP Assays on Plasmids**

We developed plasmids to serve as positive controls for the KASP-PCR reaction. Plasmid controls were ideal because they allow for rapid generation of DNA of a known genotype and eliminate the need to maintain both species of Myriophyllum as well as the inter-specific hybrid in hydroponic culture as positive genotyping controls.

The plasmid DNA performed consistently from assay to assay and allowed us to more accurately characterize unknown individuals in the KASP assay. For SNP 118, SNP 363, and SNP 478, all ten samples from a given genotype formed a tight, distinct cluster on the HEX-FAM x-y plot (FIG. 2). SNP 118 had a very clear M. sibiricum cluster, but the M. spicatum and the 1:1 synthetic hybrids were relatively close to each other, due to increased FAM fluorescence for the M. spicatum samples (FIG. 2A). However, there was no overlap between the M. spicatum samples and the synthetic hybrid samples. SNP 363 and SNP 478 show obvious separation of the fluorescence signal from each of the three possible genotypes, with the M. spicatum plasmids having almost exclusively HEX signal, M. sibiricum plasmids having almost exclusively FAM signal, and the 1:1 mixture of each genotype having both HEX and FAM signal (FIGS. 2B, C). No plasmid had an ambiguous call or fell below the 30% fluorescence threshold for any of the three SNPs. This test confirmed the utility of plasmids as internal positive controls for the subsequent genotyping.

**KASP Assays on Lab Biotypes**

We tested several biotypes of Myriophyllum that are maintained in aquaponics culture at CSU. These biotypes were originally collected from various locations in North America (Table 2). The KASP results from all three SNP primer sets showed that eight of these biotypes clustered with the M. spicatum plasmid control, with high HEX signal and minimal FAM signal (Norway, CSU KCK, 4BC, St Helens, Hall, Stoney 2, Fawn, Hanbury), while eight clustered with the 1:1 synthetic hybrid mixture of M. spicatum and M. sibiricum plasmid controls, with approximately equal HEX and FAM fluorescent signals (Hayden, Mattoon, Houghton, Alpine 2, Alpine 3, Richard Farm, Jeff, Alpine 1) (Table 2, FIG. 3).

The predicted probability that a genotype call was correct was calculated by performing discriminant analysis on the corrected fluorescence data for each SNP separately and for all three SNPs together (Table 2). Particularly for SNP118, several individuals had a reduced probability that the genotype was correct (e.g., Norway or Stoney 2). However, when all three SNPs were considered together, the probability was 100% for each genotype call (Table 2). These results confirm that all three SNPs are strongly linked and co-inherited and therefore the three SNPs can be used together to provide accurate genotyping.

**KASP Assays on Rainbow and Walleye Lake**

We also tested our assay on individuals from two lakes in northern Colorado, Rainbow Lake (n=23) and Walleye Lake (n=16). For Rainbow Lake, all sampled individuals were the invasive M. spicatum, as the fluorescence signal from all three SNPs for each individual was predominantly the HEX wavelength (Table 3, FIGS. 4A, 4B, 4C).

Walleye Lake, however, contained individuals of both M. spicatum and M. sibiricum, with 11 individuals showing predominantly HEX fluorescence and clustering with the M. spicatum plasmid controls, while four individuals (plants 2, 3, 8, and 12) showed predominantly FAM fluorescence and clustered with the M. sibiricum plasmid controls (Table 4, FIGS. 4D, 4E, 4F). Additionally, one individual (plant 1) had a hybrid genotype, as for all three SNPs it showed unambiguous dual HEX and FAM fluorescence and clustered with the artificial hybrid (Table 4, FIGS. 4D, 4E, 4F).

Discriminant analysis again verified the accuracy of the genotyping calls, with a few individuals having a lower-confidence genotype from SNP 118 (plants 20 and 23 from Rainbow Lake and plant 1 from Walleye Lake) but 100% probability of a correct call when data from all three SNPs were considered simultaneously. Both SNP 118 and SNP 478 used one degenerate base each. The calls for SNP 478 were much more accurate than for SNP 118, possibly due to the distribution of the two degenerate base within the respective forward primer. The degenerate bases in each case were for SNPs that distinguish between different sub-populations of M. sibiricum.

**Example 2**

This process will allow the seed certification industry to reliably assess bulked Amaranthus seed samples as containing Palmer amaranth or not and to assess bulked Amaranthus seed samples as containing waterhemp or not. Several Amaranthus species are very common and are not prohibited noxious weeds (e.g., redroot pigweed, smooth pigweed, etc.), and seeds of the various Amaranthus species (Table 5) cannot be reliably visually identified. This invention describes a DNA genotyping method to detect either Palmer amaranth or waterhemp in a mixture of bulked Amaranthus seeds.

**Methods:**

DNA is extracted from Amaranthus seeds using a standard CTAB DNA extraction protocol (see description, supra. Due to the presence of phenols and other compounds in seeds which may inhibit PCR, the DNA samples are further purified using a OneStep PCR Inhibitor Removal Kit (Zymo Research). DNA may also be extracted using any commercially available kits, such as Qiagen DNEasy.

The Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) region in Amaranthus species contains sequence polymorphisms that enable the identification of each of nine Amaranthus species. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) can be quickly genotyped using the KASP marker system. An alignment of nine Amaranthus species (A. palmeri, A. spinosus, A. albus, A. blitoides, A. arenicola, A. tuberculatus, A. hybridus, A. powellii, and A. retroflexus) (FIG. 5,) shows where SNPs occur among the species. FIG. 5A indicates (with ̂̂) where a double SNP (two consecutive nucleotides) differentiates A. palmeri from the other eight species (Table 6; see FIG. 6 for entire ITS alignment). Table 7 lists the A. palmeri specific forward primer used in a KASP assay to amplify this specific sequence, along with the forward primer that amplifies the other eight species and the universal reverse primer.

FIG. 5B indicates with a single ̂ where A. tuberculatus can be distinguished from seven other common Amaranthus species (Table 6). FIG. 6 shows the ITS alignment across the species. A. arenicola is a rarer species that is closely related to A. tuberculatus and cannot be distinguished using the ITS sequence (SEQ ID NO: 17-25). A. tuberculatus is much more likely to be present in a native plant seed sample than A. arenicola. Table 7 lists the A. tuberculatus specific forward primer used in a KASP assay to amplify this specific sequence, along with the forward primer that amplifies the other seven species and the universal reverse primer.

Additionally, a SNP in the acetolactate synthase (ALS) gene enables identification of waterhemp from Palmer amaranth, spiny amaranth, Powell amaranth, and redroot pigweed (See FIG. 8 for aligment of ALS sequence among five species, SEQ ID NO: 26-30). The primers for this KASP assay are listed in Table 8.

The PCR protocol for both ITS assays is conducted on a real-time thermal cycler as follows: Touch down for ten cycles, (each cycle includes 94 C for 30 sec, followed by annealing and amplification at 63 C for 30 sec, dropping 0.6 C per cycle). The protocol then includes 24 cycles of 94 C for 30 sec and 57 C for 60 sec. The fluoresence in the plate is recorded after each cycle, and data from the last cycle are used for species identification.

**Results:**

FIG. 9 is a graph showing results with the Palmer amaranth forward primer (FAM) and all other Amaranthus species forward primer (HEX). In this case, Palmer amaranth seeds were mixed with redroot pigweed in ratios of 10:0, 8:2, 6:4, 4:6, 2:8, and 0:10 to test for specificity between these two species. No template controls (NTC) were included to control for non-specific fluorescence in the assay. The assay is able to identify 1 Palmer amaranth seed in a mixture of 4 total seeds (see 2:8 mixture ratio). FIG. 10 shows results with Palmer amaranth forward primer (FAM) and all other Amaranthus species forward primer (HEX). Palmer amaranth seeds were mixed with waterhemp in ratios of 10:0, 8:2, 6:4, 4:6, 2:8, and 0:10 to test for specificity between these two species. No template controls (NTC) were included to control for non-specific fluorescence in the assay. The assay is able to identify 1 Palmer amaranth seed in a mixture of 4 total seeds (see 2:8 mixture ratio).

FIG. 11 shows waterhemp forward primer (FAM) and all other Amaranthus species forward primer (HEX). Waterhemp seeds were mixed with Palmer amaranth in ratios of 10:0, 8:2, 6:4, 4:6, 2:8, and 0:10 to test for specificity between these two species. No template controls (NTC) were included to control for non-specific fluorescence in the assay. The assay is able to identify 1 waterhemp seed in a mixture of 4 total seeds (see 2:8 mixture ratio). One data point is missing. In FIG. 12 results are shown with waterhemp forward primer (FAM) and all other Amaranthus species forward primer (HEX). Waterhemp seeds were mixed with redroot pigweed in ratios of 10:0, 8:2, 6:4, 4:6, 2:8, and 0:10 to test for specificity between these two species. No template controls (NTC) were included to control for non-specific fluorescence in the assay. The assay is able to identify 1 waterhemp seed in a mixture of 4 total seeds (see 2:8 mixture ratio).

As can be seen, the KASP assay for the ITS region can detect at a minimum one Palmer amaranth seed in a mixture of five total seeds (FIGS. 9 and 10), and one waterhemp seed in a mixture of five total seeds (FIGS. 11 and 12). This assay enables reliable assessment of an Amaranthus seed mixture as to whether or not it contains the species of interest, Palmer amaranth or waterhemp.

The KASP assay for the ALS SNP can accurately differentiate waterhemp from Palmer amaranth (FIG. 13), and this assay can also be used to differentiate waterhemp in a mixture with spiny amaranth, Powell amaranth, and redroot pigweed. Synthetic hybrids were created by mixing Palmer and waterhemp DNA in a 50:50 mixture. A KASP assay with a waterhemp forward primer (HEX, AMATA) and a Palmer amaranth forward primer (FAM, AMAPA) was used to identify samples including known waterhemp, known Palmer amaranth, synthetic hybrids, and unknown samples (shown to be Palmer amaranth). No template controls (NTC) were included to control for non-specific fluorescence in the assay.

