# Introduction:

The discovery and characterization of the sigma receptors began in 1976 with W. R. Martin et. al.'s exploration of the impact of the opioids on chronic spinal dogs. In these studies, they observed that the opioids morphine (1), ketocyclazocine, (2), and (rac)-SKF-100047 (3) produced different responses and hypothesized that each compound was interacting with a different receptor. They designated these receptors the µ-opioid receptor (morphine type, MOR), the κ-opioid receptor (ketocyclazocine type, KOR), and the σ-opioid receptor (SKF-100047 like). [1] Follow-up studies conducted in the early 1980s using the individual enantiomers of SKF-100047) demonstrated that the two enantiomers elicited physiological responses through different biochemical pathways. The opioid mediated physiological response observed with (-)-SKF-100047 was determined to be the result of interactions with MOR and KOR. In addition, these studies revealed that (+)-SKF-100047 interacts with a previously unknown, nonopioid receptor that was designate the sigma receptor (σR). [2] In 1993, W. D. Bowen et. al. determined that Figure 1: Structures of morphine (1), ketocyclazocine, (2), and (rac)-SKF- 100047 (3) there were two sub-types of this receptor, which were designated sigma-1 (σ1) and sigma-2 (σ2). [3] Three years later, Glossman H, et.al. cloned and expressed the mammalian σ1 receptor in yeast cells, [4] and in 2016 a crystal structure of the human σ1 receptor was reported. [5] To date, there is no known natural ligand for this receptor.

The nature and function of the σ2 receptor, on the other hand, remains the subject of intense research, but some progress has been made. The natural ligand of this receptor remains a mystery, but A.C. Krusea et. al. have demonstrated that the protein originally described as the σ2 receptor is identical to Transmembrane Protein 97 (TMEM97, also known as MAC30 (Meningioma-associated protein). [6] The σ2 receptor is present in lysosomes and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and there is evidence that cholesterol binds this receptor. [7] Regulation of the Niemann-Pick protein NPC1 has also been suggested by H. Runz et. al.[8[Although the pharmacological role of σ2 remains unclear, substantial effort has been devoted to the development of σ2 binders based on the premise that aberrant σ2 pharmacology contributes to the progression of diseases and conditions such as Alzheimer's disease, [9] traumatic brain injury, [10] neuropathic pain, [11] schizophrenia, [12] and cancer. [13] We recently reported a series of novel, selective γ-butyrolactones sigma-2 ligands that included the identification of ( 4). This compound was found to have moderate affinity σ2 ligand (Ki = 142 nM), excellent selectivity for this target over σ1 (Ki = 10,000 nM) and high stability in the presence of both mouse and human liver microsomes (MLM, HLM T1/2 = 60 min.). Herein we report follow up studies that describe the synthesis and characterization of a related series of novel γ-butyrolactones in which we explore (1) the impact of altering the length of the linker between the two ring systems, and (2) replacements of the aryl piperazine moiety with alternative ring systems.

Results and discussion: Synthesis of substituted γ-butyrolactones was conducted as shown in Scheme 1 (missing compound #s) utilizing novel methods developed in our laboratory. The synthesis of these compounds begins with the known benzyl protected alkenyl alcohols (5), which were converted to the corresponding epoxide (6) with mCPBA. Ring opening of epoxide (6) with the enolate of 2-ethyl-N,N-dimethylbutanamide via deprotonation with LDA provided an intermediate alcohol, which cyclized to form the γ-butyrolactone ring (7) in the presence of trifluoroacetic acid. Removal of the benzyl protecting group via hydrogenation in the presence of palladium on carbon provided the corresponding alcohol, which was then reacted with tosyl chloride in the presence triethyl amine to provide (8). Reaction of (8) with amines in refluxing THF provided the final target molecules (9). Alternatively, the previously reported γbutyrolactone alcohol (10) was reacted with tosyl chloride in the presence triethyl amine, followed by amines in refluxing THF to provided the final target molecules (9). Tables 1 and2 describe the in vitro binding (Ki at σ1 and σ2), physicochemical properties (MW, TPSA, LogP, solubility), and mouse liver microsomal (MLM) stability. All of the compounds are consistent with Lipinski's rule of 5 (MW, cLogP) and have acceptable water solubility. In addition, TPSA and cLogP of the compounds are in a range that is indicative of BBB penetration. While the majority of compounds had low MLM stability, we were able to identify 3 compounds with MLM T1/2 values > 10 minutes. Stability in MLM is an important factor, as future in vivo studies will be performed in rodents.

The structure activity relationship analysis of this series of compounds begins with an examination of the impact of length of the linker chain between the two rings systems (9a-9c). As indicated in table 1, compounds with chain lengths of 2 (9a), 3 (9b), and 4 (9c) methylene units bind to σ2 with moderate to high potency (σ2 Ki = 82, 7.7, and 12 nM), but selectivity versus σ1 was low (σ1 KI = 138.31, and 5.5 nM). Decreasing the size of the dialkyl side chains of the γ-butyrolactone (9d) lead to a nearly 10-fold decrease in σ2 potency (Ki = 753 nM) relative to (9a).

We next examined the impact of changes to the aryl piperazine region. Replacing the phenyl piperazine of (9a) with the corresponding 1-naphthyl piperazine (9e) led to a moderate increase in σ2 potency (Ki = 32 nM), as well as increase in selectivity over (σ1 KI = 2167 nM) in comparison to (9a). Notably, this compound is the least soluble analog (sol = 47 mM), which is almost certainly the increase aromatic character of the aryl piperazine region. Employing heteroaromatic replacements for the aryl piperazine produced mixed results. While the 4pyridine analog (9f) is a moderate affinity σ2 ligand (Ki = 142 nM), with a high degree selectivity for this target over σ1 (Ki = 10,000 nM), the corresponding 4-pyrimidine analog (9g) had limited capacity to bind to σ2 (KI = 10000 nM) and low affinity for σ1 (Ki = 1017 nM).

Incorporation of potential piperazine bioisosteres produced compounds with high σ2 potency and moderate to low selectivity versus σ1. Specifically, the homopiperazine analog (9h), 2,6-diazaspiro [3.3]heptane analog (9i), and octahydropyrrolo [3,4-c]pyrrole analog (9j) are all potent σ2 binders (Ki = 6.8, 53, and 3.5 nM) with low to moderate selectivity over σ1 (Ki = 17,12,31 nM). Interestingly, the combination of the octahydropyrrolo [3,4c]pyrrole bioisostere and 4-pyrdine substituent (9k) led to improved σ2 potency (KI = 29 nM) versus the piperazine analog (9f), but decreased σ1 selectivity (KI = 142 nM). In addition, the high level of MLM stability observed with (9f) was maintained in (9k) (MLM T1/2 = 60 min).

We next turned our attention to replacing the aryl piperazine moiety with tetrahydroisoquinolines. The unsubstituted tetrahydroisoquinoline analog (9l) is a potent σ2 binder (Ki = 6.1 nM), with moderate σ1 selectivity (KI = 125 nM). Incorporating halogens in the 7-position of the tetrahydroisoquinoline nucleus produced compounds (9m-9o) with potency similar to that observed with the unsubstituted analog (7-F (9m) σ2 Ki =7.4   nM, 7-Cl (9n) σ2 Ki =2.8 nM, 7-Br (9o) σ2 Ki =7.4 nM). Interestingly, while the 7-F (9m) and 7-Cl (9n) analogs had moderate selectivity for σ2 over σ1, the 7-Br analog (9o) was nearly equipotent at these two receptors (σ1 Ki = 4.7 nM). Insertion of a pyridine nitrogen into the tetrahydroisoquinoline framework substantially diminished σ2 binding. The 2,6-naphthyridine (9p) and 2,7-naphthyridine (9q) analogs had limited capacity to bind to σ2 (Ki = 10,000 nM), while the 1,7-naphthyridine (9r) demonstrated moderate σ2 binding (Ki = 277 nM). As noted in tables 1 and 2, the majority of compounds are highly soluble in aqueous media (> 100 M) and their physicochemical properties (MW, TPSA, cLogP) are consistent with drug-like properties as defined by Lipinski. [14] Conclusions: In summary, a series of substituted lactones with drug-like physicochemical properties (MW, TPSA, cLogP) have been investigated as potential selective σ2R ligands. We have determined that increasing the length of the linker chain from two (9a) to four carbons (9c) leads to increase 2 potency, but selectivity over 1 decreases. In addition, we have demonstrated that 2 potency and selectivity for 2 over 1 Is maintained when the phenyl ring of the aryl piperazine is replaced with 1-napthylene (9e) or 4-pyridine (9f), but replacement with a 4-pyrimidine (9g) leads to a significant lose of 2 potency. Replacement of the piperazine ring with bioisosteres such as homopiperazine (9h) 2,6-diazaspiro [3.3]heptane (9i), and octahydropyrrolo [3,4-c]pyrrole (9j) was tolerated with respect to 2 potency, but 1 selectivity was substantially decreased. Incorporation of tetrahydroisoquinolines (9l-9o) in place of the aryl piperazine also produced high potency 2 binders, but naphthyridine analogs examined to date had limited 2 binding capacity.

We anticipate these studies will help us further evaluate the potential value of this series for the identification of novel therapeutic agents for the treatment of diseases associated with abnormal σ2 activity. Future studies will be focused on the identification of highly potent, selective, novel 2 binders that have improved MLM stability.

Experimental methods and materials: Reagents were purchased from Fisher Scientific, VWR International, Sigma Aldrich, and Combi-Blocks, Inc. Chromatographic purification of compounds (normal phase and reverse phase) were carried out on a Teledyne Isco Combiflash RF system. H-NMR spectra were obtained on a Bruker 400-MHz NMR. Chemical shift values ( values) were reported in ppm relative to TMS. For multiplicity, s = singlet, d = doublet, t = triplet, m = multiplet. Purity (%) and mass spectral data were determined with a Waters Agilent 1200 HPLC/MS (Zorbax SB-C18, 2.1 x 30 mm, 3.5 μm, 100% water/0.1% formic acid to 100% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid over 4.0 minutes, 1.0 mL/min.) with a diode array detector from 210-400 nm and Agilent 6130 quadrupole MS. All compounds were purified to 95% purity or greater as determined by HPLC/MS and 1H-NMR. Melting points were recorded on a capillary melting point apparatus.

Preparation of ((pent-4-en-1-yloxy)methyl)benzene: To a dry round bottom flask under nitrogen was added 1.4 g of 60% NaH dispersion (0.834 g NaH, 34.5 mmol, 2eq.), followed by ~200 mg of tetrabutylammonium iodide. 18 mL of dry THF was added and the reaction was cooled to 0 o C using an ice bath. Pent-4-en-1-ol (1.5 g, 17.4 mmol, 1 eq.) was added dropwise. The reaction was stirred at 0 o C for 5 minutes and then benzyl bromide (3.57 g, 21 mmol, 1.2 eq.) was added. The reaction was warmed to room temperature and stirred overnight. The reaction was quenched with sat. NH4Cl (15 mL) and then extracted 3x10 mL diethyl ether. The combined organic layers were dried over Na2SO4, filtered and concentrated onto Celite under reduced pressure. The crude material was purified by flash chromatography (silica; ethyl acetate/hexanes, 0% ~ 5%). Percent yield: 100%. 1 H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.45-7.26 (m, 5H), 5.87 (m, 1H), 5.08 (dq, J= 1.8, 17.2 Hz, 1H), 5.01 (m, 1H), 4.55 (s, 2H), 3.54 (t, J= 6.5 Hz, 2H), 2.20 (q, J= 7.6 Hz, 2H), 1.77 (quin,J= 7.6 Hz,2H).

Preparation of ((hex-5-en-1-yloxy)methyl)benzene: The title compound was prepared according to the procedure for ((pent-4-en-1-yloxy)methyl)benzene, except hex-5-en-1-ol was substituted for pent-4-en-1-ol.

Percent yield: 100%. 1   3.15 g, 17.9 mmol, 1 eq.) and CH2Cl2 (45 mL). Resulting solution is then cooled to 0 o C with an ice bath and then 3-chloroperbenzoic acid (5.25 g (6.82 g, 77% purity), 30 mmol, 1.67 eq.) was added in portions. The reaction was allowed to warm to room temperature and stir overnight. The solution was filtered through a plug of Celite and washed filter with CH2Cl. The solution was then washed with 3x10 mL of 1N NaOH (aq.) solution, dried over Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure. The crude oil was used in the next step without further purification. Percent yield: 72%. 1  NH4Cl solution (aq.) and extracted 3x20 mL CH2Cl2. The combined organic layers were dried over Na2SO4, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure.

Crude material was then dissolved in CH2Cl2 (30 mL) and trifluoroacetic acid (5 mL) was added slowly. The resulting solution was allowed to stir at room temperature for 40 minutes before being slowly quenched with sat.

NaHCO3 solution (aq.) and extracted with 3x10 mL CH2Cl2. The combined organic layers were dried over Na2SO4, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The crude product was purified by flash chromatography (silica; ethyl acetate/hexanes, 0% ~ 30%). Percent yield: 32%. 1   1.77 (dd,J= 9.3,13.3 Hz,1H),10H),0.89 (dt,J= 7.4,19.7 Hz,6H). Preparation of 3,3-diethyl-5-(3-hydroxypropyl)dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one: To a round bottom flask was added 10% Pd/C (182 mg, 20% wt) followed by a solution of 5-(3-(benzyloxy)propyl)-3,3-diethyldihydrofuran-2(3H)one (910 mg, 3.13 mmol, 1 eq.) in EtOH (18 mL). The reaction was put under H2 (1 atm) using a balloon and stirred at room temperature under H2 atm overnight. The reaction was then filtered through a plug of Celite and the filtrate was concentrated under reduced pressure. The crude product was used in next step without further purification. Percent yield: 100%. 1 H NMR (400 MHz, MeOD) δ 4.61 (b,1H),4.38 (m,1H),3.48 (m,2H),2.11 (dd,J= 6.8,13.3 Hz,1H), 1.73 (dd,J= 9.3,13.1 Hz,1H),8H),0.81 (dt,J= 7.6,18.8 Hz,6H). Preparation of 3,3-diethyl-5-(4-hydroxybutyl)dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one: The title compound was prepared according to the procedure for 3,3-diethyl-5-(3-hydroxypropyl)dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one, except 5-(4-(benzyloxy)butyl)-3,3-diethyldihydrofuran-2(3H)-one was substituted for 5- (3-(benzyloxy)propyl)-3,3diethyldihydrofuran-2(3H)-one. Percent yield: 100%. 1 H NMR (400 MHz, MeOD) δ 4.38-4.23 (m, 3H), 2.08   (dd, J= 6.5, 13.0 Hz, 1H), 1.77-1.63 (m, 1H), 1.63-1.20 (m, 10H), 0.76 (dt, J= 7.4, 17.7 Hz, 6H). Preparation of 3-(4,4-diethyl-5-oxotetrahydrofuran-2-yl)propyl 4-methylbenzenesulfonate (8a): To a solution of triethylamine (493 mg, 4.85 mmol, 1.5 eq.) and p-toluenesulfonyl chloride (744 mg, 3.90 mmol, 1.2 eq.) in CH2Cl2 (25 mL) was added a solution of 3,3-diethyl-5-(3-hydroxypropyl)dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one (650 mg, 3.25 mmol, 1.0 eq.) in CH2Cl2 (5 mL) at 0 O C. The reaction was allowed to stir at RT overnight before being washed with 2x20 mL of sat. NaHCO3 solution (aq.). The organic layer was dried over Na2SO4, filtered and concentrated under reduced pressure. The crude product was purified by flash chromatography (silica; ethyl acetate/hexanes, 0% ~ 40%). Percent yield: 55%. 1 H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.69 (d, J= 8.3 Hz, 2H), 7.28 (d, J= 8.1 Hz, 2H),   4.23 (m, 1H), 4.05-3.91 (m, 2H), 2.36 (s, 3H), 2.00 (dd, J= 6.7, 13.2 Hz, 1H), 1.84-1.40 (m, 9H), 0.80 (dt, J=   7.5, 19.5 Hz, 6H).

Preparation of 4-(4,4-diethyl-5-oxotetrahydrofuran-2-yl)butyl 4-methylbenzenesulfonate (8b): The title compound was prepared according to the procedure for 3-(4,4-diethyl-5-oxotetrahydrofuran-2-yl)propyl 4methylbenzenesulfonate, except 3,3-diethyl-5-(4-hydroxybutyl)dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one was substituted for 3,3diethyl-5-(3-hydroxypropyl)dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one. Percent yield: 4.65%. 1 H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.71   (d, J= 8.3 Hz, 2H), 7.28 (d, J= 8.1 Hz, 2H), 4.24 (m, 1H), 4.00-3.90 (m, 2H), 2.38 (s, 3H), 2.00 (dd, J= 6.7, 13.0 Hz, 1H), 11H),0.84 (dt,J= 7.5,22.5 Hz,6H).

Preparation of 3,3-diethyl-5-(4-(4-phenylpiperazin-1-yl)butyl)dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one trifluoroacetate (9c):

To a small vial was added 4-(4,4-diethyl-5-oxotetrahydrofuran-2-yl)butyl 4-methylbenzenesulfonate (25 mg, 0.0679 mmol, 1 eq.) and 1-phenylpiperazine (23.1 mg, 0.142 mmol, 2.1 eq.) then both were dissolved in THF (1.7 mL). The reaction mixture was allowed to reflux for 72 hours and then cooled to room temperature. The mixture was filtered, the precipitate was washed with THF, and the combined organic layers were concentrated under reduced pressure. Crude product was then purified by HPLC (CH3CN/H2O, 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid), 0%~100%) to give desired product as a trifluoroacetic acid salt. Percent yield: 41.4%. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.24 (t, J= 7.9 Hz, 2H), 6.92 (t,J= 7.4 Hz,1H),6.87 (d,J= 8.3 Hz,2H),4.29 (m,1H),4H),2H),4H),2.04 (dd,J= 6.8,13.1 Hz,1H),3H), 8H),0.85 (dt,J= 7.5,20.9 Hz,6H) 92, 150.20, 132.89, 127.03, 121.14, 79.53, 56.52, 54.13, 52.41, 50.87, 39.37, 32.81, 31.91, 30.68, 11.00, 10.87; MS (LC/MS, M+H + ): 331. MeOH:dichloromethane, 0% ~ 10%). Percent yield: 32%. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.32 (td, J= 1.1, 7.7, 2H), 7.00 (t, J= 7.4, 1H), 6.95 (d, J= 8.6, 1H), 4.40 (m, 1H), 3.70 (m, 4H), 3.35 (m, 2H), 3.16 (t, J= 8.1, 2H), 3.01 (b, 2H), 2.16 (dd, J= 6.7, 13.4, 1H), 2.01 (m, 2H), 1.81 (m, 2H), 1.64 (m, 5H), 0.94 (dt, J= 7.5, 22.4 δ 8.07 (m,1H),7.88 (m,1H),7.66 (d,J= 8.2 Hz,1H),7.52 (m,2H),7.44 (t,J= 7.7 Hz,1H),7.16 (d,J= 7.4 Hz,1H),4.49 (m,1H),3.81 (t,J= 9.3 Hz,2H),8H),2.36 (m,1H),2.25 (dd,J= 6.8,13.3 Hz,1H),2.08 (m,1H),1.88 (dd,J= 9.3,13.3 Hz,1H),1.65 (q,J= 7.5 Hz,4H),0.95 (dt,J= 7.4,17.7 Hz,6H)  Aqueous solubility (pH 7.4) assay: Compounds were assessed for their solubility at pH 7.   

