# ■ RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The fabrication procedure for the paper sensors is illustrated schematically in Figure 1A. First, wax patterns are printed on the chromatography paper (grade 1 CHR, 200 × 200 mm 2 , Whatman, U.K.) using a commercially available wax printer (ColorQube 8580, Xerox corporation, USA) and baked for 10 min at 120 °C in a conventional oven. When heated, the layer of wax printed on the surface of paper wicks through the bulk of the substrate and forms a hydrophobic barrier, defining the electrolytic cell. The wax barrier plays two important roles: (i) It prevents wicking of any droplets of water condensed during exhalation to the contact pads during operation. (ii) The wax pattern contains a solution of electrolyte before the water is evaporated from the substrate to form a solid electrolyte. Next, the reference electrode (RE) and conducting tracks are screenprinted with Ag/AgCl paste (C2040308P2, Gwent Group, U.K.) and baked for 10 min at 80 °C. Finally, the carbon counter (CE), blank, and PB-mediated sensing electrodes are screen-printed using the nonmediated and mediated carbon pastes (C2030519P4 and C2070424P2, Gwent Group, U.K.) and baked for 15 min at 80 °C.

We place the paper-based sensor chip inside a wearable respiratory mask, such that the patient is breathing directly onto the sensor. For integration into the ventilation mask, the paper chip is glued between two PMMA sheets with an opening for the electrodes, as depicted in Figure 1B. With this, the sensor is mechanically stabilized and, at the same time, the conducting tracks are isolated from potential shorts due to water droplets originating from exhaled breath. Furthermore, we modify the housing of a commercial filter (Figure 1C) by replacing the sidewalls with custom-made 3D printed parts to mount the paper-based sensor into the housing, which allows us to place it directly in the respiratory flow. With this approach, moisture from the breath is captured by the paper sensor to wet the electrodes, forming a liquid electrolytic cell, which is crucial for the operability of the sensor. The entire system is illustrated in Figure 1D.

Because paper itself is not ionically conductive, a droplet of electrolyte is placed on the paper and dried, before measuring analytes from exhaled breath. For the first measurements, 0.1 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) is used as the electrolyte, but during the measurement, the sensor dried quickly; thus, it is not possible to maintain constant conditions. To solve this problem, several electrolytes and humectants are tested (see Figure S9). We have captured cyclic voltammograms (CVs) in dry (after 1 day) and wet (DI water added) conditions and finally with a droplet of 160 μM H 2 O 2 . Most of the compounds tested either could not keep the paper wet or inhibited the detection of H 2 O 2 . Since 1 M potassium chloride (KCl) provides better characteristics for the CVs and better sensitivity for H 2 O 2 in amperometric measurements than all other examined compounds, it is chosen as the electrolyte for further experiments.

For the calibration of the paper-based H 2 O 2 sensor, the current behavior over time is recorded for different hydrogen peroxide concentrations. Amperometry at a constant potential of 0.0 V versus Ag/AgCl (a screen-printed RE electrode) is carried out using different paper chips (n = 7). The frontside of the electrodes is isolated using an adhesive tape, as the paperbased sensors are positioned in the respiratory mask with the backside facing the user; hence, the frontside of the electrode structures has no direct contact with the exhaled breath. First, a droplet of 1 M KCl solution is placed on the electrolytic cell of the paper chip, and then, measurements with increasing the H 2 O 2 concentration are performed. The obtained calibration curve is shown in Figure 2A. Here, a linear measurement range between 5 and 320 μM hydrogen peroxide is achieved with a sensitivity of 0.19 nA μM -1 mm -2 and a correlation coefficient of 0.99. Besides, the current values at a given H 2 O 2 concentration, obtained from seven different sensors, prove a very small deviation. This means that a single prior calibration of the final sensor design delivers reliable absolute values and the H 2 O 2 measurement in simulated breath can be performed calibration-free (without any calibration).

To mimic the human respiration, it is necessary to create a periodic air flow, generating a warm and humid gas flow using a lung simulator, as the human exhaled breath contains ∼100% RH at a temperature of around 34 °C. Using a customized LabVIEW software (National Instruments, USA), the lung simulator pumps a desired volume of air with a predefined frequency. The RH and temperature are adjusted using a commercially available humidifier (HumiCare 200, Grundler Medical, Germany) that contains heated tubing. To introduce different concentrations of H 2 O 2 an evaporator with a heating element is placed in between the lung simulator and the paper sensor. A scheme of this setup is illustrated in Figure 2B, and a video describing the entire measurement setup can be found in the Supporting Information.

Since the moisture content of the paper is varying with the changing RH during inhalation and exhalation, to study the effect of RH on the redox characteristics of the PB-mediated carbon electrode, we performed CV measurements using a dry chip, pretreated with 1 M KCl, in H 2 O 2 -free simulated breath. In all experiments (except the tests of respiration frequency and volume), the lung simulator is set to generate a tidal volume of 500 mL and a frequency of 15 breaths per minute, which are realistic values for a healthy adult. As it can be observed in Figure 2C, the initially dry sensor can be wetted only by the respiratory stream itself, assuring a high and more reliable electrochemical signal. After 195 breaths (13 min), the measured current signals do not alter anymore and exhibit a typical PB-CV of a wet sensor in 1 M KCl.

In Figure 3A, the current signal of an amperometric measurement at different respiration frequencies is illustrated. It is noticeable that slower breathing results in a lower frequency of the signal measured and vice versa, while no significant signal change is observed by a volume change (see Figure 3B). During one breathing period, the water content in the paper changes periodically, as the air stream is drier during inhalation and reaches a RH of ∼100% during exhaling. Accordingly, the ionic conductivity of the paper fibers changes. 21,23 Even though variations in conductivity are less important in an amperometric setup, the signal might decrease if the paper becomes too dry (see Figure 2C). However, as the blank electrodes without PB show a similar response, we conclude that the periodic variations must be mostly attributed to capacitive currents due to the humidity dependent changes of the dielectric properties of the paper. 32 Probably, only fibers in direct contact with the electrode surface contribute to this effect. Hence, this capacitive part of the current is probably quite sensitive to the surface morphology of every individual electrode and is expected to reach its maximum at the reversal points of the respiratory movement.

To obtain a calibration curve for hydrogen peroxide in the vapor of the artificial breath, H 2 O 2 solutions of different concentrations are evaporated and the current signal over time is recorded continuously. A typical measurement is shown in Figure 3C. As soon as a steady-state current is reached, the next higher concentration is added, as indicated with the arrows labeled with the corresponding concentration. In our measurement setup, there is an additional delay resulting from the time the analyte needs to be transported toward the sensor surface after the injection of the sample. Therefore, it is not possible to extract the real response time from this data. Nevertheless, the response time to obtain a steady-state current depends on the peroxide concentration in the vapor. The reason for this behavior is probably due to the time it takes for the concentration of H 2 O 2 in vapor to equilibrate with its dissolved form in water (i.e., dissolved in the moisture within paper). At higher H 2 O 2 concentrations in the vapor, the gradient between vapor and "paper electrolyte" is higher, and thus, a steeper current increase as well as a higher limiting current is expected, which is almost in line with our observations.

The behavior of the blank (background) electrode can be also observed in Figure 3A-C. The measured blank signals do not settle at the same baseline currents as the sensing electrode. However, these different baseline currents can be aligned for the evaluation by setting an offset value (see Figure S11).

For the construction of the calibration curve, the current densities of the blank curve are first subtracted from those of the sensor electrode. After averaging and baseline subtraction, a measurement value is taken for each hydrogen peroxide concentration at a point on the timeline shortly before the next higher concentration is injected. The baseline value of the sensor is taken right before addition of the first hydrogen peroxide concentration of 40 μM. The mean values for the calibration curve presented in Figure 3D are obtained from three independent measurements.

From these results, it can be concluded that H 2 O 2 concentrations in the range between 40 and 320 μM give rise to a response with a sensitivity of 0.02 nA μM -1 mm -2 and a correlation coefficient of 0.99. It is crucial to note, however, that the resulting current signals for the respective H 2 O 2 concentrations are significantly lower than those of the former calibration in aqueous solutions (Figure 2A). This may be due to the heating of the H 2 O 2 in the evaporator and the poor stability of H 2 O 2 in DI water (see Figure S10). By correlating the obtained current densities with those of the previous calibration in solution, the real H 2 O 2 concentrations in the vapor of the artificial breath can be estimated to lie between 5 and 40 μM. This means that, after evaporation, the H 2 O 2 concentration may be decreasing to approximately 1/8 of its original value while the same sensitivity as in solution is maintained, i.e., 0.19 nA μM -1 mm -2 (Figures 3D andS12). The humid air from the humidifier also dilutes the analyte, yielding a smaller concentration. Nevertheless, after accounting for all of these factors, a reliable quantification of different hydrogen peroxide concentrations in vapor is achieved and the proof-of-concept of the claimed approach for on-site H 2 O 2 analysis in simulated exhaled breath is successfully demonstrated for the first time. In summary, this work describes a differential electrochemical method using low-cost and lightweight porous materials (in our case cellulose paper) for on-site monitoring of hydrogen peroxide in exhaled breath. For compatibility with standardized ventilation masks, the sensor developed is integrated into the housing of a commercially available airway filter for anesthetic applications. Under realistic conditions by simulating human respiration with authentic lung volume and respiration rate, the proof-of-principle of the hydrogen peroxide measurements in artificial exhaled breath is successfully shown for the first time. The high reliability and reproducibility of our sensing approach allow us to measure calibration-free, i.e., it is unnecessary to perform a calibration before or after each measurement. With further modifications and improvements, this sensor model can be employed in a large variety of applications, including clinical or wearable monitoring of exhaled breath.

Our method has the following five advantages: (i) because of differential measurements, the influence of various interfering substances and/or environmental conditions (e.g., temperature, humidity) is eliminated; hence, the system always produces reliable results. (ii) By changing, modifying, and/or coating the material of the sensing electrode (for instance, with metals, metal oxides, semiconducting micro-and nanoparticles, enzymes, selective membranes, or conducting polymers), the sensor model presented can be extended for the analysis of other compounds of exhaled breath. (iii) A flexible and hygroscopic porous support, like paper, acts as a "solid electrolyte", eliminating the need for additional membranes (containing the electrolyte) and at the same time as a substrate for the electrodes. (iv) Flexible and porous substrates can be shaped and patterned in a way that the sensing surface as well as the collection volume can be considerably increased. (v) The orientation and porosity of the sensing surface can be tuned to minimize breathing resistance and to improve signal quality.

The system proposed has the following disadvantages: (i) the sensor's sensitivity achieved with the commercially available PB-mediated carbon paste does not allow us to measure within the clinically relevant concentration range of H 2 O 2 in exhaled breath (0.1-1.5 μM in the case of EBC 6 ) and (ii) the electrolyte employed (1 M potassium chloride) gets dried quickly under ambient conditions and thus the paper chip needs some running time (less than 15 min) to be moistened after its exposure to the respiration. Furthermore, as the humidity in paper changes while inhaling and exhaling, the conductivity and ion concentration of the "solid paper electrolyte" and thus the measured signals vary periodically.

These, however, can be overcome by a few improvements: (i) the search for the optimum humectant as a possible electrolyte should be continued since it would facilitate the handling and signal processing, if the sensor stayed wet and does not adsorb any humidity from the breath. (ii) PBmediated carbon paste with different PB contents and modification procedures must be tested to further increase the H 2 O 2 sensitivity. Alternatively, hydrophilic metal electrodes (especially Pt), realized by metallization of fabrics, can be examined for their applicability. 33 Besides, the implemented system should be extended with a compact and low-power wearable signal readout unit along with a smartphone app to enable on-site monitoring. Overcoming these issues, mainly with their sensitivity and humectants, electrochemical wearable sensors using porous materials (such as paper) would pave the way for calibration-free, continuous monitoring of exhaled breath.

# ■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT

## * S Supporting Information

The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 

# ■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research has been partially funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) under grant numbers UR 70/18-01, SCHU 2499/7-1, and DI 2345/3-1. F.G. thanks the Wellcome Trust (207687/Z/17/Z) and EPSRC (EP/ R010242/1) for their generous support. We would like to thank Richard Bruch for providing the lasered PMMA sensor carriers and helping with the 3D printer. Furthermore, we would also like to thank Dr Jochen Kieninger for discussions about the electrode design.

