# 

The organic field‐effect transistors used in this work had a bottom‐gate, bottom contact geometry.[  23  ] This device architecture allows for direct exposure of the organic semiconductor to the radiation beam. We started with a rigid structure, with a SiO2 layer playing the role of bottom‐gate dielectric, and later expanded to large‐area flexible substrates with a Cytop gate dielectric. The contacts were made of Au and the semiconductor was 2,8‐difluoro‐5,11‐bis(triethylsilylethynyl)anthradithiophene (diF‐TES ADT), a material that has shown remarkable electrical properties, with charge carrier mobilities close to 20 cm2 V−1 s−1 in devices with near ideal current–voltage characteristics,[  24  ] and strong sensitivity to X‐rays, although past work has focused on much higher doses and used different methods for detection.[  5 ,  25  ] The OFETs were fabricated using standard procedures and their electrical properties were first characterized in air and dark, prior to exposure.[  24  ] The devices were sandwiched without compression between two slabs of tissue‐equivalent calibration layers and irradiated through the top layer. The experimental set‐up is shown in Figure  2a. The X‐ray radiation was supplied by a medical‐grade linear accelerator (Elekta Versa HD, Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center), and the corresponding relative dose as a function of depth is shown in Figure 2b. Test samples consisting of arrays of OFET devices were placed in the center of the X‐ray field, as described in the Experimental Section. This setup reproduces the reference irradiation geometry used for radiation beam calibration in the clinical setting. The samples were exposed to radiation doses in increments of 0.2 Gy between 0 and 1 Gy, and in increments of 2 Gy from 2 to 10 Gy, at a nominal dose rate of 6 Gy min−1. Control samples were fabricated using identical procedures, but were not exposed to X‐rays, and were tested along with the irradiated ones, to be able to decouple the aging effects from the interaction with radiation (see Figure S1, Supporting Information).

Typical device output characteristics are shown in Figure 2c, where we plot the drain current I D as a function of drain–source voltage V DS for fixed gate–source voltages, V GS. In Figure 2d we show the dependence of I D on V GS at constant V DS before exposure to radiation (solid line, see Figure S2 in the Supporting Information for forward and reverse sweeps) and after absorbing 100 cGy of radiation (dashed line); the curves obtained after other exposure doses are included in Figure S3 in the Supporting Information. It can be clearly observed that irradiation caused a shift in the threshold voltage of the OFET, i.e., the intercept of square‐root‐of‐drain‐current curve (blue) and the V GS‐axis, as marked in Figure 2d (more details about the analysis can be found in Figure S4, Supporting Information). This shift ΔV Th is described by Equation (1) \(\Delta V_{Th} = V_{ThD} - V_{{Th}0}\) where V ThD represents the threshold voltage at the target dose and V Th0 the threshold voltage at zero dose, i.e., before irradiation. To ensure that the threshold voltage was uniformly determined for each measurement, we adopted the method of the second derivative of I D with respect to V GS.[  24  ] This type of dosimetry, where the measurements are taken after exposing the sample to radiation, is referred to as passive. Passive sensors rely on the detection of changes induced in the sample upon exposure to radiation and that persist after exposure; on the contrary, active sensors monitor in real time by recording the photoconductive gain.[  26  ] In this case, a passive detection ensures that the irradiation and device testing take place sequentially, i.e., there is no voltage applied to the RAD‐OFET while it is placed on a patient.

In Figure  3a we plot the shift in the threshold voltage as a function of radiation dose, in red, along with the changes recorded in the control sample. While the control samples exhibit negligible changes, a shift in the threshold voltage can be observed upon irradiation, with two regions being clearly distinguished. At low irradiation doses, Region I—between 0 to 1 Gy, the irradiated OFETs exhibited a positive shift in the threshold voltage, up to a value of 6.1 ± 0.2 V, obtained at 1 Gy. The average sensitivity of the detector, defined as S v = ∆V Th/Dose, was determined to be S V = 60 ± 8 mV cGy−1 for region I, a value which corresponds to S I = (2.2 × 107 ± 0.2 × 107) µC Gy−1 cm−3, where S I = (I D − I D,0)/(Detector Volume × Dose Rate), I D is the current measured after exposure, and I D,0 is the current prior to irradiation (both currents correspond to an applied gate–source voltage of V GS = −60 V). This sensitivity value is similar to that obtained at high doses with other dosimeters based on organic semiconductors,[  5 ,  11  ] but in our case the performance was obtained under clinically relevant conditions for radiation treatment, where typical doses applied to patients do not exceed 200 cGy per treatment. In Region II, from 1 to 10 Gy, a negative shift in the threshold voltage is observed, with a sensitivity of S V = 4.6 ± 0.9 mV cGy−1 (S I = (8.9 × 106 ± 0.2 × 106) µC Gy−1 cm−3).

To gain more insight into the processes responsible for the observed threshold voltage shifts, we also evaluated the evolution of the charge carrier mobility (μ) in response to sample irradiation. The mobility was calculated from the slope of the square‐root of the drain current curve with respect to the gate–source voltage (blue curves in Figure 2d), using Equation (2) \(I_{D} = \frac{W}{L}\frac{C_{i}}{2}\mu\left( {V_{GS} - V_{Th}} \right)^{2}\) where L and W are the channel length and the channel width, respectively, and C i the capacitance per unit area of the dielectric.[  23  ] Figure 3b shows the response of μ to cumulative dose; it is notable that the mobility did not change over the course of the treatments, suggesting that the organic semiconductor layer does not experience major chemical changes. Indeed, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, gas chromatography, UV–vis spectroscopy, and thin‐layer chromatography indicated that no degradation occurs in the organic semiconductor film. We do not exclude, however, that chemical changes take place, but the resulting impurity is below the detection limit of our techniques. Attempts to restore the device properties by thermal annealing or room‐temperature annealing resulted in partial recovery, while the solvent annealing results were inconclusive (see Figure S5, Supporting Information). The evolution of sensitivity with the gate‐source voltage for the low and high dose rates is included in Figure 3c in yellow and blue, respectively. At low bias the sensitivity is hampered by multiple trapping and de‐trapping events, which also impact the accuracy of reading, as demonstrated by the large error bars. When the voltage exceeds a critical value, which allows most of the holes accumulated in the transistor channel to be free, only a small dependence of the gate‐source voltage is recorded, thus the RAD‐OFET response is independent on the applied voltage.

The experimental results obtained upon controlled X‐ray irradiation of the OFETs allowed us to propose a mechanism for the operation of the RAD‐OFET dosimeters. The invariance in charge carrier mobility, along with partial recovery upon annealing, encouraged us to consider interfacial effects and structural defects as possible causes for the observed changes. The positive threshold voltage shift recorded upon exposure to low dose rates (Regime I) is indicative of electron trapping, a phenomenon that can occur either in the dielectric or in the organic semiconductor, close to the semiconductor/dielectric interface. The interaction of X‐rays with the OFETs results in a cascade of events. First, ionizing radiation causes the formation of an electron–hole pair, i.e., an exciton, in the organic semiconductor and in the SiO2 layers (see Figure  4a).[  27 ,  28 ,  29  ] A fraction of these photogenerated charges will immediately recombine, while the rest will dissociate, resulting in free electrons and holes. The electrons are trapped at the semiconductor/dielectric interface by hydroxyl groups or other impurities and defects present here, while the holes, which are more resilient to trapping events, contribute directly to transport.[  30  ] There will be two contributions to the hole density: one from the processes occurring within the organic semiconductor layer, and the other from the dielectric, where the holes move through a series of hopping states toward the dielectric/semiconductor interface to contribute to transport (Figure 4a). The effect can be reduced if a high density of holes remains trapped in the oxide, a process that would contribute to a negative shift in the threshold voltage, which counteracts the effect of the holes that migrate to the interface and contribute to a positive shift. By performing capacitance measurements on the SiO2 dielectric layer (Figure 4b), we concluded that the hole trapping in the oxide is minimal, since the dielectric capacitance remained constant at the dose levels used in this study, at an average value of C i = 17 ± 1 nF cm−2. Some of the holes that reach the interface may, however, become deeply trapped here, creating long‐lived states which persist over longer time scales (e.g., days, months) and contribute to a negative shift in threshold voltage. While in Region I the photogeneration of holes overcomes the trapping events, resulting in a shift toward more positive threshold voltages, the higher doses (>100 cGy) experienced by the OFETs in Regime II appear to generate significant hole trapping and lead to a negative shift. This shift results from the eventual build‐up of deeply trapped holes at the interface and the structural defects occurring in the semiconductor, although we do not exclude the possibility of material degradation at levels below the detection limit of our chemical analysis techniques, but that are relevant to electronic transport.

Trap generation in organic materials upon interaction with ionizing radiation has sparked great interest lately. Batlogg and co‐workers showed that proton irradiation results in cleaving of the C─H bond in single crystal rubrene, a process that generates deep trap states.[  31  ] They also found that X‐ray irradiation yields local structural disorder, which is a common source of traps in organic semiconductors.[  32  ] Proton irradiation of triisopropylsilyl ethynyl (TIPS) pentacene OFETs resulted in positional disorder,[  33  ] and electron irradiation of rubrene thin films induced n‐doping and a negative threshold voltage shift.[  34  ] Podzorov et al. used air‐gap rubrene OFETs to eliminate the interfacial affects and concluded that the shifts recorded in the threshold voltage upon interaction with X‐rays result from the deep traps created in the crystal.[  35  ] Figure 4c includes a sketch of possible molecular re‐orientations leading to positional disorder in the diF‐TES ADT film. The solid‐state packing was elucidated in our past work,[  36  ] and the distortion is exaggerated here for clarity: it includes rotations (1, 3), translations (2), and a combination of both (4). Such defects have been shown to be the origin of electronic traps with an energetic distribution that is dependent on the material and the exact nature of the defect.[  37 ,  38  ] A schematic representation of the energetic distribution of the trap density of states is included in Figure 4d, with shallow traps creating acceptor‐like and donor‐like tail states in the vicinity of the frontier orbitals and deep traps laying in the middle of the bandgap. Since we have not observed changes in charge carrier mobility upon exposure to radiation (Figure 3b), we hypothesize that the molecular re‐arrangements generate deep traps. De‐trapping of charge carriers residing here is highly unlikely since the trap depth is high, and thus they cannot contribute to transport.[  32  ]

The tests performed on samples fabricated on silicon substrates provide robust perspectives for OFET adoption in medical radiation dosimetry. To take full advantage of the unique properties of organic semiconductors, next we integrated them with flexible substrates. Large‐area, flexible dosimeters can be placed directly onto the patient without the need for additional hardware, allowing for a higher accuracy and resolution of radiation detection and reducing the complexity and cost of the medical equipment. These devices were fabricated in a bottom gate, bottom contact configuration, onto polyethylene terephthalate (PET) flexible substrates with a predefined indium tin oxide (ITO) layer, which played the role of the gate electrode, and Cytop gate dielectric (Figure  5a). Due to the hydrophobic nature of the fluorinated polymer Cytop, an additional surface treatment was applied to increase its surface energy and allow solution deposition of the organic semiconductor, as described elsewhere.[  39  ] These devices exhibited similar shifts in the threshold voltage, and the resulting sensitivity was (5.2 × 107 ± 0.3 × 107) µC Gy−1 cm−3. To test the mechanical robustness of the flexible OFET dosimeter, devices were flexed using a computer‐controlled servo (Figure 5c, inset) to a bending radius of 8 mm. Devices were exposed to a dose of 100 cGy and the sensitivity was measured as a function of the number of folding and unfolding cycles; the results for different effective gate‐source voltages are included in Figure 5, where the effective gate‐source voltage is the difference between the applied gate voltage and the device threshold voltage V  GS,eff = V GS − V Th.

The dependence of sensitivity on gate‐source voltage is in agreement with the results presented in Figure 3c. As for the tolerance to bending, a slight decrease in sensitivity occurs after 10 bends, most likely due to mechanical strains created at device interfaces and partial layer delamination, followed by a region of constant response between 10 and 10 000 bending cycles. A drastic decrease in sensitivity is observed after 10 000 cycles. Optical inspection of the films suggests that the micro‐cracks that formed in the film are responsible for the performance degradation. Nevertheless, the good tolerance to folding exhibited by our OFET radiation detectors for the first 1000 bending cycles makes them attractive for incorporation in large area flexible radiation detectors.

We introduced a new concept for fabricating passive radiation dosimeters for medical applications, which we named the RAD‐OFET. The device is based on organic thin‐film transistors, and the radiation dose is detected as a shift in the threshold voltage. The sensor is robust and highly sensitive for doses relevant to a variety of medical radiation procedures, including patient dose monitoring during cancer diagnosis and therapy. To understand the results, we proposed a model based on photogeneration of charges upon X‐ray exposure, followed by charge trapping at the semiconductor/dielectric interface. The hole dynamics is governed by a competition between the accumulation of the photogenerated holes and deep trapping within the organic semiconductor, a process which is highly depended on the radiation dose. For RAD‐OFETs fabricated on silicon substrates, at low doses, below 200 cGy, trapping is minimal, and a positive shift is recorded in the threshold voltage, with a sensitivity of 60 ± 8 mV cGy−1 ((2.2 × 107 ± 0.2 × 107) µC Gy−1 cm−3). At high doses the trap formation prevails, leading to a negative shift and a sensitivity of 4.6 ± 0.9 mV cGy−1 ((8.9 × 106 ± 0.2 × 106) µC Gy−1 cm−3). Solution processing allowed for integration with flexible substrates for the development of conformal RAD‐OFETs with high sensitivties, (5.2 × 107 ± 0.3 × 107) µC Gy−1 cm−3. Placement of the sensor directly onto the human body, coupled with the similarity in the atomic number between the electronically active layer and the human tissue, may greatly enhance the precision and reduce the complexity of the medical equipment, facilitating high quality measurement of patient doses. The application of therapeutic radiation with high precision increases the effectiveness on treating cancerous tissue and minimizes the impact on the surrounding healthy cells. The sensitivity of the proposed devices can be further enhanced with fine tuning the molecular structure of the organic semiconductor layer. These findings uncover new opportunities for organic circuits that will not only improve the quality of patient care, but they can have applications even beyond the cancer therapy. Such applications include OFET dosimeter placement in unique irradiation geometries and types, monitoring of personnel dose in hazardous environments, and measurement of space radiation.

# Experimental Section

## Device Fabrication

### Device Fabrication

#### Device Fabrication

Bottom‐gate, bottom‐contact devices were fabricated on both highly doped silicon substrates with a 200 nm SiO2 dielectric layer, and PET substrates with ITO gate electrodes and a protein‐modified dielectric layer, as described in earlier work.[  39  ] The SiO2 substrates were cleaned by immersion in hot acetone (85 °C) for 10 min, followed by a thorough rinse in acetone and immersion in hot isopropyl alcohol (IPA, 85 °C) for 10 min. The substrates were then rinsed in IPA and dried by a stream of nitrogen. Next, they were exposed to a UV–ozone treatment for 10 min, rinsed with deionized water, and dried in a nitrogen stream. For both substrate types, the source and drain electrodes were patterned by shadow masks and consisted of a 5 nm titanium adhesion layer deposited by electron beam deposition at a rate of 1 Å s−1, followed by thermally evaporated gold at a rate of 0.5 Å s−1. The contacts were treated for 30 min using a 30 × 10−3 m solution of room‐temperature pentafluorobenzene thiol (PFBT) in ethanol, rinsed with ethanol, and dried in a stream of nitrogen. The diF‐TES ADT semiconductor film was deposited by spin coating from a 16.5 mg mL−1 solution in chlorobenzene at 104 rad s−1 (1000 rpm) for 80 s, then placed in vacuum for 18 h to remove additional solvent. The CYTOP 809‐M dielectric layer was spin coated at 208 rad s−1 (2000 rpm) for 60 s, then annealed at 55 °C overnight, yielding a 1.4 µm film.

#### Device Characterization And Threshold Voltage Extraction

Transistor characterization was carried out in a nitrogen environment in dark using an Agilent 4155 C Semiconductor Parameter Analyzer. Devices were tested immediately after fabrication, as well as after each radiation dose. The control sample was not irradiated, but transported with and kept under similar environment as the irradiated samples. Capacitance measurements were taken using an Agilent E4980A LCR meter on reference and irradiated samples using the quasi‐static capacitance voltage measurement technique on samples consisting of the dielectric layer sandwiched between a gold top electrode and a highly doped Si substrate which also played the role of bottom electrode. Threshold voltages were extracted from the plot of the square root of the drain current, I D, with respect to the gate‐source voltage, V GS, using the maximum of the second derivative of I D with respect to V GS to bracket a linear extrapolation to where I D = 0 V, and that voltage taken as the threshold voltage.

#### X‐Ray Irradiation Of Dif‐Tes‐Adt Radiation Sensors

X‐ray radiation was administered to samples using an Elekta Versa HD linear accelerator at a dose rate of 600 cGy min−1. The devices were sandwiched without compression between two slabs of tissue equivalent material, i.e., (Gammex) Solid Water (top layer, to provide maximum percent depth dose to the devices, 1.5 cm thick; bottom layer, to provide backscatter to the devices, 10 cm thick) and irradiated through the top layer in increments of 20 cGy from 0 to 100 cGy, and then in increments of 200 cGy from 100 to 1000 cGy. Test samples, which were ≈1.5 cm × 1.5 cm and contained arrays of OFET devices, were placed in the center of a 10 × 10 cm2 field of 6 MV X‐rays, 100 cm from the source at depth of 1.5 cm.

#### Mechanical Durability Testing Of Flexible Dosimeters

Repeated bending of devices was accomplished via a computer‐controlled servo to ensure a consistent curvature and the substrates were bent to a radius of 8 mm. Devices were electrically characterized for an irradiation dose of 100 cGy, before bending, and after each set of bending cycles, for sets of bending cycles from 1 to 10 000.

#### Chemical Analysis Of Irradiated Dif‐Tes‐Adt

Analysis of irradiated samples by gas chromatography / mass spectrometry (Bruker 436 GC / Scion SQ MS) showed diF‐TES ADT as the dominant product, along with trace amounts (<0.1%) of the monofluoro and trifluoro derivatives, in the same ratio as in the original un‐irradiated sample. Proton NMR analysis of the irradiated sample (400 MHz Bruker Advance NEO) showed traces of endoperoxide, but this impurity often forms during sample preparation, and the same trace impurity was found when preparing pristine samples of diF TES ADT using the same conditions.

#### Statistical Analysis

The data used for the extraction of threshold voltage shifts was not pre‐processed before the analysis. The sensitivity of the dosimeters was extracted at constant effective gate‐source voltage, where the effective gate‐source voltage is the difference between the applied gate‐source voltage and the device threshold voltage V GS,eff = V GS − V Th. Device outliers were excluded prior to analysis based on the reliability of the I D 1/2 versus V GS curve, using the coefficient of determination (R 2) value of a linear fit to the data. Values less than R 2 = 97% were excluded, as the model shown in Equation (2) predicts linear behavior of I D 1/2 versus V GS. Results are presented as (mean ± SD), where SD represents standard deviation, followed by the appropriate units. All experiments had a sample size of at least n = 10, and statistical analysis was performed using OriginPro 2016 (OriginLab Corporation).

# Conflict Of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

