# DESCRIPTION

## FIELD OF INVENTION

The present disclosure relates generally to polypeptides encoded by an adeno-associated virus (AAV)-derived endogenous viral element (mAAV-EVE1) found within the germline of numerous closely-related marsupial species. The disclosure is also related to nucleic acid molecules encoding the polypeptides, vectors comprising the nucleic acid molecules and recombinant AAV virions comprising polypeptides. The disclosure also relates to uses of nucleic acid molecules, vectors and recombinant AAV virions.

## BACKGROUND OF THE DISCLOSURE

Gene therapy has most commonly been investigated and achieved using viral vectors, in particular adeno-associated viral vectors. Adeno-associated virus (AAV) is a replication-deficient parvovirus, the single-stranded DNA genome of which is about 4.7 kb in length. The AAV genome includes inverted terminal repeat (ITRs) at both ends of the molecule, flanking two open reading frames: cap and rep. The cap gene encodes three capsid proteins: VP1, VP2 and VP3. The three capsid proteins typically assemble in a ratio of 1:1:10 to form the AAV capsid, although AAV capsids containing only VP3, or VP1 and VP3, or VP2 and VP3, have been produced. The cap gene also encodes the assembly activating protein (AAP) from an alternative open reading frame. AAP promotes capsid assembly, acting to target the capsid proteins to the nucleolus and promote capsid formation. The rep gene encodes four regulatory proteins: Rep78, Rep68, Rep52 and Rep40. These Rep proteins are involved in AAV genome replication.

The ITRs are involved in several functions, in particular integration of the AAV DNA into the host cell genome, as well as genome replication and packaging. When AAV infects a host cell, the viral genome integrates into the host's chromosome resulting in latent infection of the cell. Thus, AAV can be exploited to introduce heterologous sequences into cells. In a natural system, a helper virus (for example, adenovirus or herpesvirus) provides genes that allow for production of AAV virus in the infected cell. In the case of adenovirus, genes E1A, E1B, E2A, E4 and VA provide helper functions. Upon infection with a helper virus, the AAV provirus is rescued and amplified, and both AAV and adenovirus are produced.

Recombinant AAVs containing a genome that lacks some, most or all of the native AAV genome and instead contains one or more heterologous sequences flanked by the ITRs have been successfully used in gene therapy settings. One of the major problems associated with the use of recombinant AAV is the pre-existing immunity in patients to AAV, particularly the AAV serotypes that most commonly circulate among humans, such as AAV2. The immune response is almost entirely directed to the capsid protein. Another problem is the limited tropism of the commonly used recombinant AAV virions. Thus, there is a continued need for alternative recombinant AAV virions, in particular those that contain capsid proteins that are distinct from those of the AAV serotypes in circulation and that are resistant to pre-existing immunity to AAV, and those with broader or different tropism.

## SUMMARY OF THE DISCLOSURE

The present disclosure is predicated in part on the identification of an adeno-associated virus (AAV)-derived endogenous viral element (mAAV-EVE1) found within the germline of numerous closely-related marsupial species. Nucleic acid molecules containing the various mAAV-EVE1 genes, such as the capsid gene (cap) and fragments thereof, can be used to produce rAAV virions. The cap gene of mAAV-EVE1 and the encoded capsid polypeptides have limited homology to other known AAV serotypes. As a result, rAAV virions comprising these capsid polypeptides or fragments thereof are particularly useful for gene therapy in humans because pre-existing anti-AAV antibodies are unlikely to cross-react with the rAAV virions. The rAAV virions may also exhibit altered tropism, which may confer enhanced performance on the AAV system for gene addition and/or genome editing functions.

In one aspect, the present disclosure is directed to an isolated capsid polypeptide, comprising the sequence of amino acids set forth in SEQ ID NO:2 or a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:2. In some embodiments, the capsid polypeptide comprises the sequence of amino acids set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1.

In particular examples, the capsid polypeptide comprises a region selected from among a phospholipase A2 (PLA2) domain set forth in amino acid residues 41-100 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-I set forth in amino acid residues 250-259 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-II set forth in amino acid residues 313-318 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-III set forth in amino acid residues 368-376 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-IV set forth in amino acid residues 436-454 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-V set forth in amino acid residues 473-489 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-VI set forth in amino acid residues 510-528 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-VII set forth in amino acid residues 531-552 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-VIII set forth in amino acid residues 575-590 of SEQ ID NO:1; and a VR-IX set forth amino acid residues 700-707 of SEQ ID NO:1, or corresponding regions of a polypeptide comprising the sequence of amino acids set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1.

The present disclosure is also directed to a chimeric capsid polypeptide, comprising at least or about 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500, 550, 600, 650, or 700 contiguous amino acids of the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide set forth in SEQ ID NO: 1; and contiguous amino acids from a capsid protein other than the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide set forth in SEQ ID NO: 1. In some instances, the chimeric capsid polypeptide comprises at least or about 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500, 550, 600, 650, or 700 contiguous amino acids from a capsid protein other than the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide. In particular examples, the chimeric capsid polypeptide comprises the sequence of amino acids set forth in SEQ ID NO:2 or a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:2.

In one embodiment, the chimeric capsid polypeptide comprises a region selected from among a PLA2 domain set forth in amino acid residues 41-100 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-I set forth in amino acid residues 250-259 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-II set forth in amino acid residues 313-318 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-III set forth in amino acid residues 368-376 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-IV set forth in amino acid residues 436-454 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-V set forth in amino acid residues 473-489 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-VI set forth in amino acid residues 510-528 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-VII set forth in amino acid residues 531-552 of SEQ ID NO:1; a VR-VIII set forth in amino acid residues 575-590 of SEQ ID NO:1; and a VR-IX set forth amino acid residues 700-707 of SEQ ID NO:1, or corresponding regions of a polypeptide comprising the sequence of amino acids set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1.

Also provided are recombinant AAV (rAAV) virions comprising a capsid polypeptide or a chimeric capsid polypeptide described above and herein. In particular embodiments, the rAAV further comprises a heterologous sequence.

The present disclosure further provides nucleic acid molecules encoding a capsid polypeptide or a chimeric capsid polypeptide described above and herein. In one embodiment, the nucleic acid molecule comprises the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:3 or a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:3.

The present disclosure is also directed to vectors comprising a nucleic acid molecule of described above and herein. In one example, the vector is selected from among a plasmid, cosmid, phage, transposon and viral vector. In instances where the vector is a viral vector, the viral may be, for example, an AAV, lentiviral, retroviral, adenoviral, herpesviral, hepatitis viral or baculoviral vector.

Also provided are host cells comprising a rAAV, a nucleic acid molecule and/or a vector described above and herein.

The present disclosure is also related to a method for introducing a heterologous sequence into a host cell, comprising contacting a host cell with a rAAV described above and herein that contains a heterologous sequence.

Also provided herein is a method for producing a chimeric capsid gene, comprising: (a) providing two or more AAV capsid genes from two or more serotypes of AAV, wherein at least one capsid gene encodes a capsid polypeptide described above and herein; (b) digesting the AAV capsid genes into fragments; and (c) reassembling the fragments using PCR to form a chimeric capsid gene. In some examples, the chimeric capsid gene encodes a region or domain of a capsid polypeptide as described above and herein. Using such methods, a library of chimeric capsid genes may be produced.

In some embodiments, the method for producing a chimeric capsid gene further comprises inserting the chimeric capsid gene into a vector, such as, for example, an AAV vector. Using such methods, a library of vectors may be produced. In particular embodiments, the AAV vectors are introduced into a host cell under conditions sufficient to produce a rAAV virion, thereby producing a rAAV virion comprising a chimeric capsid. In some instances, a library of rAAV virions is produced.

Also provided, therefore, are chimeric capsid genes and libraries thereof, vectors and libraries thereof, and rAAV and libraries thereof, produced by these methods.

The present disclosure is also directed to a method for producing a rAAV virion, comprising introducing into a cell a nucleic acid molecule described above and herein, an AAV rep gene, an AAV vector comprising a heterologous sequence flanked by inverted terminal repeats, and helper functions for generating a productive AAV infection; and allowing assembly of an rAAV virion comprising a capsid encoded by the nucleic acid molecule, wherein the capsid encapsidates the heterologous sequence.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION

Unless defined otherwise, all technical and scientific terms used herein have the same meaning as is commonly understood by one of skill in the art to which the disclosure belongs. All patents, patent applications, published applications and publications, databases, websites and other published materials referred to throughout the entire disclosure, unless noted otherwise, are incorporated by reference in their entirety. In the event that there is a plurality of definitions for terms, those in this section prevail. Where reference is made to a URL or other such identifier or address, it understood that such identifiers can change and particular information on the internet can come and go, but equivalent information can be found by searching the internet. Reference to the identifier evidences the availability and public dissemination of such information.

As used herein, the singular forms “a”, “an” and “the” also include plural aspects (i.e. at least one or more than one) unless the context clearly dictates otherwise. Thus, for example, reference to “a polypeptide” includes a single polypeptide, as well as two or more polypeptides.

In the context of this specification, the term “about,” is understood to refer to a range of numbers that a person of skill in the art would consider equivalent to the recited value in the context of achieving the same function or result.

Throughout this specification and the claims which follow, unless the context requires otherwise, the word “comprise”, and variations such as “comprises” and “comprising”, will be understood to imply the inclusion of a stated integer or step or group of integers or steps but not the exclusion of any other integer or step or group of integers or steps.

As used herein, a “vector” refers to a nucleic acid molecule which is capable of capable of delivering a heterologous sequence contained within the vector into a host cell and is capable of replication when associated with the proper control elements. Vectors can be episomal, i.e., do not integrate into the genome of a host cell, or can integrate into the host cell genome. Exemplary vectors include, but are not limited to, plasmids, cosmids, phage, transposons and viral vectors, such as AAV, lentiviral, retroviral, adenoviral, herpesviral, hepatitis viral and baculoviral vectors.

As used herein, the term “AAV vector” refers to a vector derived from any adeno-associated virus serotype isolated from any animal species, including without limitation, AAV-1, AAV-2, AAV-3, AAV-4, AAV-5, AAV-6, AAV-7, AAV-8 and the mAAV-EVE described herein. Accordingly, an AAV vector includes at least one element of AAV origin and has the capacity to be packaged into a recombinant AAV virion. AAV vectors can have one or more of the AAV wild-type genes deleted in whole or part, but retain functional flanking ITR sequences, which are necessary for the rescue, replication and packaging of the AAV virion. Thus, an AAV vector includes at least those sequences required in cis for replication and packaging (e.g., functional ITRs) of the virus. The ITRs need not be the wild-type nucleotide sequences, and may be altered, e.g., by the insertion, deletion or substitution of nucleotides, as long as the sequences provide for functional rescue, replication and packaging. The AAV vector and/or virion can be utilized for the purpose of transferring heterologous sequences into cells either in vitro or in vivo.

The terms “recombinant AAV”, “rAAV”, “recombinant AAV virion”, and “rAAV virion,” are used interchangeably and refer to an infectious, replication-defective virus that includes an AAV protein shell encapsidating a heterologous sequence flanked on both sides by AAV ITRs. Recombinant AAV virions can be produced from host cells into which an AAV vector has been introduced. To facilitate packaging of the AAV vector, additional AAV-derived coding sequences, such as the AAV rep and cap genes, are also introduced into the host cell.

The term “ITR” refers to an inverted terminal repeat at either end of the AAV genome. This sequence can form hairpin structures and is involved in AAV DNA replication and rescue, or excision, from prokaryotic plasmids. ITRs for use in the present invention need not be the wild-type nucleotide sequences, and may be altered, e.g., by the insertion, deletion or substitution of nucleotides, as long as the sequences provide for functional rescue, replication and packaging of rAAV.

As used herein, “functional” with reference to a capsid polypeptide means that the polypeptide can self assemble or assemble with different capsid polypeptides to produce the proteinaceous shell (capsid) of an AAV virion. It is to be understood that not all capsid polypeptides in a given host cell assemble into AAV capsids. Preferably, at least 25%, at least 50%, at least 75%, at least 85%, at least 90%, at least 95% of all AAV capsid polypeptide molecules assemble into AAV capsids. Suitable assays for measuring this biological activity are described e.g. in Smith-Arica and Bartlett (2001), Curr Cardiol Rep 3(1): 43-49.

As used herein, “corresponding nucleotides” or “corresponding amino acid residues” refer to nucleotides or amino acids that occur at aligned loci. The sequences of related or variant polynucleotides or polypeptides are aligned by any method known to those of skill in the art. Such methods typically maximize matches (e.g. identical nucleotides or amino acids at positions), and include methods such as using manual alignments and by using the numerous alignment programs available (for example, BLASTN, BLASTP, Clust1W, Clust1W2, EMBOSS, LALIGN, Kalign, etc) and others known to those of skill in the art. By aligning the sequences of polynucleotides, one skilled in the art can identify corresponding nucleotides. For example, by aligning the mAAV-EVE1 cap gene set forth in SEQ ID NO:3 and one or more other mAAV-EVE1 cap genes set forth in SEQ ID NOs: 5-20, one of skill in the art can identify nucleotides within the other mAAV-EVE1 cap genes that correspond to particular regions or nucleotides, such as the VP3 -encoding region, in mAAV-EVE1 cap gene set forth in SEQ ID NO:3. In another example, by aligning the mAAV-EVE1 capsid polypeptide set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 with another AAV capsid polypeptide, such as the one set forth in SEQ ID NO:30, one of skill in the art can identify amino acids residues within the other AAV polypeptide that correspond to VR-I at amino acid residues 250-259 of SEQ ID NO:1 (i.e. amino acid residues 250-259 of SEQ ID NO:30)

A “heterologous sequence” as used herein refers to nucleic acid sequence present in a polynucleotide, vector, or host cell that is not naturally found in the polynucleotide, vector, or host cell or is not naturally found at the position that it is at in the polynucleotide, vector, or host cell, i.e. is non-native. A “heterologous sequence” can encode a peptide or polypeptide, or a polynucleotide that itself has a function or activity, such as an antisense or inhibitory oligonucleotide, including antisense DNA and RNA (e.g. miRNA, siRNA, and shRNA). In some examples, the heterologous sequence is a stretch of nucleic acids that is essentially homologous to a stretch of nucleic acids in the genomic DNA of an animal, such that when the heterologous sequence is introduced into a cell of the animal, homologous recombination between the heterologous sequence and the genomic DNA can occur.

As used herein, the term “operably-linked” with reference to a promoter and a coding sequence means that the transcription of the coding sequence is under the control of, or driven by, the promoter.

The term “host cell” refers to a cell, such as a mammalian cell, that has introduced into it exogenous DNA, such as a vector. The term includes the progeny of the original cell into which the exogenous DNA has been introduced. Thus, a “host cell” as used herein generally refers to a cell that has been transfected or transduced with exogenous DNA.

As used herein, “isolated” with reference to a nucleic acid molecule means that the nucleic acid molecule is substantially free of cellular material or other contaminating proteins from the cells from which the nucleic acid molecule is derived, or substantially free from chemical precursors or other chemicals when chemically synthesized.

The term “subject” as used herein refers to an animal, in particular a mammal and more particularly a primate including a lower primate and even more particularly, a human who can benefit from the present invention. A subject regardless of whether a human or non-human animal or embryo may be referred to as an individual, subject, animal, patient, host or recipient. The present invention has both human and veterinary applications. For convenience, an “animal” specifically includes livestock animals such as cattle, horses, sheep, pigs, camelids, goats and donkeys, as well as domestic animals, such as dogs and cats. With respect to horses, these include horses used in the racing industry as well as those used recreationally or in the livestock industry. Examples of laboratory test animals include mice, rats, rabbits, guinea pigs and hamsters. Rabbits and rodent animals, such as rats and mice, provide a convenient test system or animal model as do primates and lower primates. In some embodiments, the subject is human.

It will be appreciated that the above described terms and associated definitions are used for the purpose of explanation only and are not intended to be limiting.

mAAV-EVE1 Nucleic Acid Molecules and Polypeptides

The present disclosure is predicated in part on the identification of an adeno-associated virus (AAV)-derived endogenous viral element (mAAV-EVE1) found within the germline of numerous closely-related marsupial species. As described herein, the mAAV-EVE1 comprises the major structural and non-structural genes observed in other AAV serotypes (FIG. 1), although with relatively limited sequence homology (FIGS. 2 and 3). The mAAV-EVE1 cap gene encodes capsid polypeptides, including at least a VP1 protein and a VP3 protein (FIG. 3). Also encoded by the cap gene is an AAP polypeptide (FIG. 1). The mAAV-EVE1 also contains a rep gene that encodes a Rep protein (FIG. 2). Thus, provided herein are polypeptides comprising all or a portion of the mAAV-EVE1 capsid polypeptides, including polypeptides comprising all or a portion of the VP1 protein and/or the VP3 protein, and variants thereof. Also provided are nucleic acid molecules encoding all or a portion of the mAAV-EVE1 capsid polypeptides and variants thereof. Additionally, provided are polypeptides comprising all or a portion of the mAAV-EVE1 Rep protein or AAP protein and variants thereof, and nucleic acid molecules encoding such polypeptides.

mAAV-EVE1 Capsid

Provided herein are isolated capsid polypeptides. The capsid polypeptides of the present disclosure have amino acid sequences that are quite distinct and divergent from other AAV capsid polypeptides described previously, including capsid polypeptides from AAV serotypes that commonly circulate amongst humans. Accordingly, the capsid polypeptides of the present disclosure are particularly useful for producing rAAV virions for gene therapy.

Capsid polypeptides of the present disclosure include those that comprise all or a portion of a mAAV-EVE1 VP1 protein, such as a VP1 protein having an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1. Thus, provided are capsid polypeptides comprising an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1. In one example, the capsid polypeptide comprises a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:30. The present disclosure also provides VP1 polypeptides comprising a sequence having at least or about 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:30.

Also provided are capsid polypeptides that comprise all or a portion of the mAAV-EVE1 VP3 protein, such as a VP3 protein with an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:2 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:2. Thus, provided are polypeptides comprising an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:2 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in any one of SEQ ID NO:2. In one example, the polypeptide comprises a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:31. Also provided are VP3 polypeptides comprising a sequence having at least or about 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:31.

Also provided are capsid polypeptides that comprise all or a portion of the mAAV-EVE1 VP2 protein, such as a VP2 protein with an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:34 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:34. Thus, provided are polypeptides comprising an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:34 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in any one of SEQ ID NO:34. In one example, the polypeptide comprises a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:35. Also provided are VP2 polypeptides comprising a sequence having at least or about 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:35.

The capsid polypeptides of the present invention include those comprising a fragment of a mAAV-EVE1 VP1, VP2 or VP3 protein, such as a fragment of a polypeptide comprising an amino acid set forth in SEQ ID NO:1, 34 or 2 or a fragment of a polypeptide having an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1, 34 or 2. In particular examples, the fragment is a fragment of a polypeptide comprising an amino acid set forth in SEQ ID NO:30, 35 or 31 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:30, 35 or 31. The fragment may be of any length but is typically at least 31 amino acids long. Exemplary fragments include those that comprise at least or about 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500, 550, 600, 650, or 700 contiguous amino acids of a polypeptide having an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1, 2, 30, 31, 34 or 35 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO: 1, 2, 30, 31, 34 or 35. Exemplary fragments include those containing the VP3 protein (e.g. SEQ ID NO:2 or SEQ ID NO:31; corresponding to amino acid residues 191-731 of SEQ ID NO:1 and SEQ ID NO:30, respectively), those that contain the phospholipase A2 (PLA2) domain (amino acid residues 41-100 of SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or corresponding residues in a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30) and those containing any one or more of the variable regions (VR), including VR-I (amino acid residues 250-259 of SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or corresponding residues in a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30); VR-II (amino acid residues 313-318 of SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or corresponding residues in a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30); (amino acid residues 368-376 of SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or corresponding residues in a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30); VR-IV (amino acid residues 436-454 of SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or corresponding residues in a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30); VR-V (amino acid residues 473-489 of SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or corresponding residues in a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30); VR-VI (amino acid residues 510-528 of SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or corresponding residues in a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30); VR-VII (amino acid residues 531-552 of SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or corresponding residues in a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30); VR-VIII (amino acid residues 575-590 of SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or corresponding residues in a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30); and VR-IX (amino acid residues 700-707 of SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or corresponding residues in a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30).

The fragments can be functional fragments, i.e. can self-assemble to form an AAV capsid (alone or when present with other capsid polypeptides) that facilitates binding and internalization of the rAAV virion into a host cell. Exemplary of the functional fragments contemplated herein are those that include a mAAV-EVE1 VP3 protein, such as a VP3 protein comprising an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:2 or SEQ ID NO:31 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:2 or SEQ ID NO:31.

In other examples, the fragments are functional when part of a chimeric capsid polypeptide, i.e. the chimeric polypeptide can self assemble or assemble with other capsid polypeptides to the AAV capsid of a rAAV virion. For example, the fragment can be part of a chimeric capsid protein that also contains fragments of capsid proteins from one or more other AAV serotypes, including, but not limited to, AAV1, AAV2, AAV3, AAV4, AAV5, AAV6, AAV7 and AAV8. Thus, also provided are capsid polypeptides that are chimeric and that include at least or about 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500, 550, 600, 650, or 700 contiguous amino acids of the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or a mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide set forth in SEQ ID NO: 1 or SEQ ID NO:30. The chimeric capsid polypeptides also comprise contiguous amino acids from a capsid protein other than the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 or a mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide set forth in SEQ ID NO: 1 or SEQ ID NO:30. For example, the chimeric capsid polypeptide can include contiguous amino acids from one or more capsid proteins from one or more of AAV1, AAV2, AAV3, AAV4, AAV5, AAV6, AAV7 or AAV8. The amino acid sequences of numerous AAV serotypes have been described and are well known in the art, and can be used to produce the chimeric capsid polypeptides of the invention. It is contemplated that the chimeric capsid polypeptides can comprise any number of contiguous amino acids from a capsid protein other than the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide, provided the resulting chimeric capsid polypeptide is functional. In some embodiments, the chimeric capsid polypeptide comprises at least or about 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500, 550, 600, 650, or 700 contiguous amino acids from a capsid protein other than the mAAV-EVE capsid polypeptide.

Also contemplated herein are nucleic acid molecules encoding the capsid polypeptides of the present disclosure. Accordingly, provided are nucleic acid molecules encoding a capsid polypeptide comprising the amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NOs: 1, 2, 30, 31, 34 or 35 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO: 1, 2, 30, 31, 34 or 35, or a fragment thereof. Exemplary nucleic acid molecules include those that comprise the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NOs:3, 4, 32, 33, 36 or 37 or a sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to the sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:3, 4, 32, 33, 36 or 37 or a fragment thereof. In particular examples, the nucleic acid molecules include a promoter operably linked to the nucleic acid encoding the polypeptides, such that the polypeptides can be expressed in a host cell.

mAAV-EVE1 AAP

The present disclosure also provides polypeptides that comprise all or a portion of the mAAV-EVE1 AAP protein. Thus, provided are AAP polypeptides comprising the amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:28 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in any one of SEQ ID NO:28.

Also provided are AAP polypeptides comprising a fragment of a mAAV-EVE1 AAP protein, such as a fragment of a polypeptide having an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:28 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:28. The fragment may be of any length but is typically at least 20 amino acids long. Exemplary fragments include those that comprise at least or about 20, 25, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180 or 200 contiguous amino acids of a polypeptide having an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:28 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:28. The fragments can be functional fragments, i.e. can promote AAV capsid formation, which can be assessed using assays well known in the art. For example, the ability of AAP to promote capsid formation of VP3 alone can be assessed as described by, for example, Sontag et al. (J. Virol. (2011) 85:12686-12697).

mAAV-EVE1 Rep

Polypeptides of the present disclosure include those that comprise all or a portion of the mAAV-EVE1 Rep protein. Thus, provided are Rep polypeptides comprising the amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:21 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in any one of SEQ ID NO:21.

Also provided are Rep polypeptides comprising a fragment of a mAAV-EVE1 Rep protein, such as a fragment of a polypeptide having an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:21 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:21. The fragment may be of any length but is typically at least 20 amino acids long. Exemplary fragments include those that comprise at least or about 20, 25, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55, 60, 65, 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500 or 550 contiguous amino acids of a polypeptide having an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:21 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:21. In one example, the fragment comprises the NS2 protein set forth at amino acids 232-581 of SEQ ID NO:21.

The present disclosure also provides nucleic acid molecules encoding the Rep polypeptides of the present disclosure. Accordingly, provided are nucleic acid molecules encoding a Rep polypeptide comprising the amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:21 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:21, or a fragment thereof. In particular examples, the nucleic acid molecule includes a promoter operably linked to the nucleic acid encoding the polypeptide, such that the polypeptide can be expressed in a host cell. The fragments can be functional fragments, i.e. can facilitate AAV replication, and can be assessed using standard assays for Rep function, such as described by Chiorini et al. (1994) J Virol. 68(2):797-804.

### Vectors

The present disclosure also provides vectors comprising a nucleic acid molecule described herein, such as one that encodes a capsid polypeptide, AAP polypeptide and/or Rep polypeptide. Typically the nucleic acid encoding the capsid polypeptide, AAP polypeptide and/or Rep polypeptide is operably linked to a promoter to allow for expression of the capsid polypeptide and/or Rep protein or fragment thereof. The vectors can be episomal vectors (i.e., that do not integrate into the genome of a host cell), or can be vectors that integrate into the host cell genome. Exemplary vectors include, but are not limited to, plasmids, cosmids, and viral vectors, such as AAV, lentiviral, retroviral, adenoviral, herpesviral, and hepatitis viral vectors. In particular examples, the vectors are plasmids. In other examples, the vectors are AAV vectors. The choice and design of an appropriate vector is within the ability and discretion of one of ordinary skill in the art.

Vectors of the present disclosure can comprise nucleic acid described herein that encodes all or a portion of a mAAV-EVE1 capsid polypeptide, e.g. that encode polypeptides comprising an amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1, 2, 30, 31, 34 or 35 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1, 2, 30, 31, 34 or 35 or fragments thereof, as described above. Such vectors can be used for the production of rAAV virions comprising a mAAV-EVE1 capsid polypeptide described herein. In particular examples, the vectors also comprise nucleic acid encoding an AAP protein, such as a mAAV-EVE1 AAP protein or fragment thereof as described herein or an AAP protein from another AAV serotype; and/or also comprise nucleic acid encoding a Rep protein, such as a mAAV-EVE1 Rep protein or fragment thereof as described herein or a Rep protein from another AAV serotype.

In some embodiments, the vectors of the present disclosure function to provide the mAAV-EVE1 capsid polypeptides, AAP polypeptides and/or Rep polypeptides or fragments thereof in trans for the production of rAAV virions. For example, in such embodiments, the vector may be co-transfected into a host cell with an AAV vector containing a heterologous sequence flanked by ITRs and a helper plasmid or helper virus such that rAAV virions containing the mAAV-EVE1 capsid polypeptides and encapsidating the heterologous sequence is produced. In other embodiments, the vectors are AAV vectors that provide the mAAV-EVE1 capsid polypeptides or fragments thereof in cis for the production of rAAV virions containing the capsid polypeptides. For such examples, the AAV vector typically also contains a heterologous sequence that will be packaged into the rAAV virion.

Thus, in some embodiments, the vectors of the present invention also comprise a heterologous sequence. The heterologous sequence may be operably linked a promoter to facilitate expression of the sequence. The heterologous sequence can encode a peptide or polypeptide, such as a therapeutic peptide or polypeptide, or can encode a polynucleotide or transcript that itself has a function or activity, such as an antisense or inhibitory oligonucleotide, including antisense DNA and RNA (e.g. miRNA, siRNA, and shRNA). In some examples, the heterologous sequence is a stretch of nucleic acids that is essentially homologous to a stretch of nucleic acids in the genomic DNA of an animal, such that when the heterologous sequence is introduced into a cell of the animal, homologous recombination between the heterologous sequence and the genomic DNA can occur. As would be appreciated, the nature of the heterologous sequence is not essential to the present disclosure. In particular embodiments, the vectors comprising the heterologous sequence(s) will be used in gene therapy.

In particular examples, the heterologous sequence encodes a peptide or polypeptide, or polynucleotide, whose expression is of therapeutic use, such as, for example, for the treatment of a disease or disorder. For example, expression of a therapeutic peptide or polypeptide may serve to restore or replace the function of the endogenous form of the peptide or polypeptide that is defective (i.e. gene replacement therapy). In other examples, expression of a therapeutic peptide or polypeptide, or polynucleotide, from the heterologous sequence serves to alter the levels and/or activity of one or more other peptides, polypeptides or polynucleotides in the host cell. Thus, according to particular embodiments, the expression of a heterologous sequence introduced by a vector described herein into a host cell can be used to provide a therapeutic amount of a peptide, polypeptide or polynucleotide to ameliorate the symptoms of a disease or disorder. In other instance, the heterologous sequence is a stretch of nucleic acids that is essentially homologous to a stretch of nucleic acids in the genomic DNA of an animal, such that when the heterologous sequence is introduced into a cell of the animal, homologous recombination between the heterologous sequence and the genomic DNA can occur. Accordingly, the introduction of a heterologous sequence by a vector or rAAV described herein into a host cell can be used to correct mutations in genomic DNA, which in turn can ameliorate the symptoms of a disease or disorder.

In embodiments where the vector is an AAV vector, the heterologous sequence is flanked by 3′ and 5′ AAV ITRs to allow packaging of the heterologous sequence into a rAAV virion. AAV ITRs used in the vectors of the invention need not have a wild-type nucleotide sequence, and may be altered, e.g., by the insertion, deletion or substitution of nucleotides. Additionally, AAV ITRs may be derived from any of several AAV serotypes, including without limitation, AAV1, AAV2, AAV3, AAV4, AAV5, AAV6, AAV7 and AAV8, etc. Such ITRs and vectors comprising them are well known in the art.

Vectors suitable for use in mammalian cells are widely described and well-known in the art. Those skilled in the art would appreciate that vectors of the present invention may also contain additional sequences and elements useful for the replication of the vector in prokaryotic and/or eukaryotic cells, selection of the vector and the expression of a heterologous sequence in a variety of host cells. For example, the vectors of the present disclosure can include a prokaryotic replicon (that is, a sequence having the ability to direct autonomous replication and maintenance of the vector extrachromosomally in a prokaryotic host cell, such as a bacterial host cell. Such replicons are well known in the art. In some embodiments, the vectors can include a shuttle element that makes the vectors suitable for replication and integration in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In addition, vectors may also include a gene whose expression confers a detectable marker such as a drug resistance gene, which allows for selection and maintenance of the host cells. Vectors may also have a reportable marker, such as gene encoding a fluorescent or other detectable protein.

The vectors of the present invention comprise promoters that facilitate expression of an operably linked coding region, such as a cap, aap or rep gene or heterologous sequence. In some examples, the promoters are AAV promoters, such as the p5, p19 or p40 promoter. In other example, the promoters are derived from other sources. Examples of constitutive promoters include, without limitation, the retroviral Rous sarcoma virus (RSV) LTR promoter (optionally with the RSV enhancer), the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter (optionally with the CMV enhancer), the SV40 promoter, the dihydrofolate reductase promoter, the β-actin promoter, the phosphoglycerol kinase (PGK) promoter, and the EF1α, promoter. Inducible promoters allow regulation of gene expression and can be regulated by exogenously supplied compounds, environmental factors such as temperature, or the presence of a specific physiological state, e.g., acute phase, a particular differentiation state of the cell, or in replicating cells only. Non-limiting examples of inducible promoters regulated by exogenously supplied promoters include the zinc-inducible sheep metallothionine (MT) promoter, the dexamethasone (Dex)-inducible mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter, the T7 polymerase promoter system; the ecdysone insect promoter, the tetracycline-repressible system, the tetracycline-inducible system, the RU486-inducible system and the rapamycin-inducible system. Still other types of inducible promoters which may be useful in this context are those which are regulated by a specific physiological state, e.g., temperature, acute phase, a particular differentiation state of the cell, or in replicating cells only. In some embodiments, tissue specific promoters are used. Non-limiting examples of such promoters include the liver-specific thyroxin binding globulin (TBG) promoter, insulin promoter, glucagon promoter, somatostatin promoter, pancreatic polypeptide (PPY) promoter, synapsin-1 (Syn) promoter, creatine kinase (MCK) promoter, mammalian desmin (DES) promoter, a α-myosin heavy chain (a-MHC) promoter, a cardiac Troponin T (cTnT) promoter, beta-actin promoter, and hepatitis B virus core promoter. The selection of an appropriate promoter is well within the ability of one of ordinary skill in the art.

The vectors can also include transcriptional enhancers, translational signals, and transcriptional and translational termination signals. Examples of transcriptional termination signals include, but are not limited to, polyadenylation signal sequences, such as bovine growth hormone (BGH) poly(A), SV40 late poly(A), rabbit beta-globin (RBG) poly(A), thymidine kinase (TK) poly(A) sequences, and any variants thereof. In some embodiments, the transcriptional termination region is located downstream of the posttranscriptional regulatory element. In some embodiments, the transcriptional termination region is a polyadenylation signal sequence.

The vectors can include various posttranscriptional regulatory elements. In some embodiments, the posttranscriptional regulatory element can be a viral posttranscriptional regulatory element. Non-limiting examples of viral posttranscriptional regulatory element include woodchuck hepatitis virus posttranscriptional regulatory element (WPRE), hepatitis B virus posttranscriptional regulatory element (HBVPRE), RNA transport element, and any variants thereof. The RTE can be a rev response element (RRE), for example, a lentiviral RRE. A non-limiting example is bovine immunodeficiency virus rev response element (RRE). In some embodiments, the RTE is a constitutive transport element (CTE). Examples of CTE include, but are not limited to Mason-Pfizer Monkey Virus CTE and Avian Leukemia Virus CTE.

A signal peptide sequence can also be included in the vector to provide for secretion of a polypeptide from a mammalian cell. Examples of signal peptides include, but are not limited to, the endogenous signal peptide for HGH and variants thereof; the endogenous signal peptide for interferons and variants thereof, including the signal peptide of type I, II and III interferons and variants thereof; and the endogenous signal peptides for known cytokines and variants thereof, such as the signal peptide of erythropoietin (EPO), insulin, TGF-β1, TNF, IL1-α, and IL1-β, and variants thereof. Typically, the nucleotide sequence of the signal peptide is located immediately upstream of the heterologous sequence (e.g., fused at the 5′ of the coding region of the protein of interest) in the vector. In instances where the vector does not include a heterologous sequence, a signal sequence can be included in the vector downstream of the promoter so that upon insertion of a heterologous sequence, the signal peptide is in-frame with the heterologous sequence.

In further examples, the vectors can contain a regulatory sequence that allows, for example, the translation of multiple proteins from a single mRNA. Non-limiting examples of such regulatory sequences include internal ribosome entry site (IRES) and 2A self-processing sequence, such as a 2A peptide site from foot-and-mouth disease virus (F2A sequence).

The vectors of the present invention can be constructed using known techniques, including, without limitation, the standard techniques of restriction endonuclease digestion, ligation, transformation, plasmid purification, in vitro or chemical synthesis of DNA, and DNA sequencing. The vectors of the present invention may be introduced into a host cell using any method known in the art. Accordingly, the present disclosure is also directed to host cells comprising a vector or nucleic acid described herein.

### Recombinant AAV

Also provided are rAAV virions comprising a polypeptide described herein, such as a polypeptide comprising all or a portion of a mAAV-EVE1 capsid protein (e.g. a polypeptide comprising the amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1, 2, 30, 31, 34 or 35 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1, 2, 30, 31, 34 or 35 or a fragment thereof). The rAAV virions can be produced using the vectors described herein, and methods for producing rAAV having a desired capsid protein are well known in the art. Typically, the rAAV virions will have packaged within them a heterologous sequence as described above.

Typically the methods involve culturing a host cell which contains a nucleic acid molecule encoding an AAV capsid polypeptide (e.g., a nucleic acid molecule encoding a polypeptide comprising the amino acid sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1, 2, 30, 31, 34 or 35 or an amino acid sequence having at least or about 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or 99% sequence identity to a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:1, 2, 30, 31, 34 or 35, or a fragment thereof); a functional rep gene; an AAV vector containing AAV ITRs flanking a heterologous sequence; and sufficient helper functions to permit packaging of the AAV vector.

In some embodiments, methods for producing a recombinant AAV include introducing into a packaging cell line a nucleic acid molecule encoding mAAV-EVE1 Cap protein or fragment thereof, a rep gene, an AAV vector, and helper functions for generating a productive AAV infection, and recovering a recombinant AAV from the supernatant of the packaging cell line. Various types of cells can be used as the packaging cell line. For example, packaging cell lines that can be used include, but are not limited to, HEK 293 cells, HeLa cells, and Vero cells, for example as disclosed in US20110201088.

The helper functions may be provided by one or more helper plasmids or helper viruses comprising adenoviral helper genes. Non-limiting examples of the adenoviral helper genes include E1A, BM, E2A, E4 and VA, which can provide helper functions to AAV packaging.

In some embodiments, the nucleic acid encoding a capsid polypeptide of the present disclosure is present in a plasmid. The plasmid can further comprise an AAV rep gene. In some instances, the rep gene is a mAAV-EVE1 rep gene. In other instances, the rep gene is from another AAV serotype, including, but not limited to, AAV1, AAV2, AAV4, AAV5, AAV6, AAV7, AAV8, AAV9, and any variants thereof.

Helper viruses of AAV are known in the art and include, for example, viruses from the family Adenoviridae and the family Herpesviridae. Examples of helper viruses of AAV include, but are not limited to, SAdV-13 helper virus and SAdV-13-like helper virus described in US20110201088, helper vectors pHELP (Applied Viromics). A skilled artisan will appreciate that any helper virus or helper plasmid of AAV that can provide adequate helper function to AAV can be used herein.

In some instances, rAAV virions are produced using a cell line that stably expresses some of the necessary components for AAV virion production. For example, a plasmid (or multiple plasmids) comprising the nucleic acid encoding a capsid polypeptide of the present invention and a rep gene, and a selectable marker, such as a neomycin resistance gene, can be integrated into the genome of a cell (the packaging cells). The packaging cell line can then be transfected with an AAV vector and a helper plasmid or transfected with an AAV vector and co-infected with a helper virus (e.g., adenovirus providing the helper functions). The advantages of this method are that the cells are selectable and are suitable for large-scale production of the recombinant AAV. As another non-limiting example, adenovirus or baculovirus rather than plasmids can be used to introduce the nucleic acid encoding the capsid polypeptide, and optionally the rep gene, into packaging cells. As yet another non-limiting example, the AAV vector is also stably integrated into the DNA of producer cells, and the helper functions can be provided by a wild-type adenovirus to produce the recombinant AAV.

As will be appreciated by a skilled artisan, any method suitable for purifying AAV can be used in the embodiments described herein to purify the recombinant AAV, and such methods are well known in the art. For example, the recombinant AAV can be isolated and purified from packaging cells and/or the supernatant of the packaging cells. In some embodiments, the AAV is purified by separation method using a CsCl gradient. In other embodiments, AAV is purified as described in US20020136710 using a solid support that includes a matrix to which an artificial receptor or receptor-like molecule that mediates AAV attachment is immobilized.

### Host Cells

Also provided herein are host cells comprising a nucleic acid molecule, vector or rAAV virion of the present disclosure. In some instances, the host cells are used to amplify, replicate, package and/or purify a polynucleotides, vector or rAAV virion. In other examples, the host cells are used to express a heterologous sequence, such as one packaged within a rAAV virion. Exemplary host cells include prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. In some instances, the host cell is a mammalian host cell. It is well within the skill of a skilled artisan to select an appropriate host cell for the expression, amplification, replication, packaging and/or purification of a polynucleotide, vector or rAAV virion of the present invention. Exemplary mammalian host cells include, but are not limited to, HEK-293 cells, HeLa cells, Vero cells, HUH7 cells, and HepG2 cells.

### Compositions and Methods

Also provided are compositions comprising the nucleic acid molecules, polypeptides and/or rAAV of the present invention. In particular examples, provided are pharmaceutical compositions comprising the recombinant virions disclosed herein and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. The compositions can also comprise additional ingredients such as diluents, stabilizers, excipients, and adjuvants.

The carriers, diluents and adjuvants can include buffers such as phosphate, citrate, or other organic acids; antioxidants such as ascorbic acid; low molecular weight polypeptides (e.g., less than about 10 residues); proteins such as serum albumin, gelatin or immunoglobulins; hydrophilic polymers such as polyvinylpyrrolidone; amino acids such as glycine, glutamine, asparagine, arginine, or lysine; mono saccharides, disaccharides, and other carbohydrates including glucose, mannose, or dextrins; chelating agents such as EDTA; sugar alcohols such as mannitol or sorbitol; salt-forming counterions such as sodium; and/or nonionic surfactants such as Tween™, Pluronics™ or polyethylene glycol (PEG). In some embodiments, the physiologically acceptable carrier is an aqueous pH buffered solution.

The rAAV virions of the present disclosure, and compositions containing the rAAV virions, may be used in methods for the introduction of a heterologous sequence into a host cell. Such methods involve contacting the host cell with the rAAV virion. This may be performed in vitro, ex vivo or in vivo.

When the methods are performed ex vivo or in vivo, typically the introduction of the heterologous sequence into the host cell is for therapeutic purposes, whereby expression of the heterologous sequence results in the treatment of a disease or condition. Thus, the rAAV virions disclosed herein can be administered to a subject (e.g., a human) in need thereof, such as subject with a disease or condition amendable to treatment with a protein, peptide or polynucleotide encoded by a heterologous sequence described herein.

Titers of rAAV virions to be administered to a subject will vary depending on, for example, the particular recombinant virus, the disease or disorder to be treated, the mode of administration, the treatment goal, the individual to be treated, and the cell type(s) being targeted, and can be determined by methods well known to those skilled in the art. Although the exact dosage will be determined on an individual basis, in most cases, typically, recombinant viruses of the present invention can be administered to a subject at a dose of between 1×1010 genome copies of the recombinant virus per kg of the subject and 1×1014 genome copies per kg.

The route of the administration is not particularly limited. For example, a therapeutically effective amount of the rAAV can be administered to the subject by via, for example, intramuscular, intravaginal, intravenous, intraperitoneal, subcutaneous, epicutaneous, intradermal, rectal, intraocular, pulmonary, intracranial, intraosseous, oral, buccal, or nasal routes. The rAAV can be administrated as a single dose or multiple doses, and at varying intervals.

### Capsid Diversification

The nucleic acid molecules of the present invention that encode the capsid polypeptides may be used in techniques for capsid diversification, which produce rAAV with chimeric capsids that contain regions or domains of capsids from multiple serotypes. Exemplary of such techniques are capsid shuffling techniques, which utilize multiple capsid genes that are then “shuffled” to generate a chimeric capsid gene, typically a library of chimeric capsid genes. These can then be used to produce rAAV comprising chimeric capsid proteins. Generally, a library of rAAV is produced, which is then screened to identify capsids and rAAV having desirable traits, such as reduced immunogenicity, reduced cross-reactivity and altered or improved cell tropism. The nucleic acids molecules of the present invention can therefore be used in such methods to produce a chimeric capsid and rAAV comprising the chimeric capsid. Accordingly, the present disclosure is also directed to methods for producing chimeric capsid genes, methods for producing vectors comprising the genes, methods for producing chimeric capsids polypeptides encoded by the genes and methods for producing rAAV comprising the chimeric capsids. Also contemplated are capsid genes, capsid gene libraries, vectors, vector libraries, capsid polypeptides, capsid polypeptide libraries, rAAV and rAAV libraries produced by these methods.

Various capsid shuffling methods have been described in the art. These include “DNA family shuffling” techniques, which have been used to generate diverse libraries of many types of proteins. DNA family shuffling involves in vitro recombination of related genes (in this instance, capsid genes) with >50% homology. The genes are first enzymatically fragmented and then reassembled based on partial homology, resulting in libraries of chimeric genes. DNA family shuffling techniques to produce chimeric capsids have been well described, such as by Grimm et al. (J. Virol. 2008. 82:5887-5911), Koerber et al. (Mol Ther. 2008. 16: 1703-1709), and Li et al. (Mol Ther. 2008. 16: 1252-1260) in U.S. Pat. Nos. 7,588,772 and 9,169,299, and are well known to those of skill in the art. Such methods can be performed using the nucleic acids provided herein that encode a capsid polypeptide of the invention.

Briefly, the methods can include providing two or more different capsid genes from two or more AAV serotypes, wherein one capsid gene encodes a capsid polypeptide of the present disclosure; enzymatically digesting the capsid genes, such as with DNase I, to produce fragments; and reassembling the fragments into chimeric capsid genes which produces a library of chimeric plasmid genes. Reassembly of the gene fragments can be performed by PCR. Because of the related nature of the different capsid genes, the gene fragments have overlapping regions of homology that allow the fragments to self prime in the absence of additional primer in the PCR. Thus, non-primer driven PCR can be used to assemble the fragments into chimeric capsid genes that contain capsid regions from multiple AAV serotypes. In some embodiments, primer-driven PCR is then also used to further amplify the chimeric capsid genes. The method can therefore produce a chimeric capsid gene encoding a chimeric capsid polypeptide that contains a fragment, region or domain of a capsid polypeptide of the present invention. The fragment, region or domain may comprise, for example, one or more of the variable regions (VR), including VR-I, VR-II, VR-III, VR-IV, VR-V, VR-VI, VR-VII, VR-VIII and/or VR-IX, and/or the PLA2 domain, as described above. Typically, a library of chimeric capsid genes is produced.

The chimeric genes can then be inserted into vectors. This can result in the generation of a vector library. The vectors may be, for example, basic plasmids that facilitate subsequent cloning, amplification, replication and/or expression. In other instances, the vectors are AAV vectors that contain AAV ITRs and a rep gene, which facilitate production of rAAV comprising a chimeric capsid protein. The AAV vectors can be introduced into a host cell under conditions that facilitate the production of rAAV virions. Such conditions are well known in the art and are briefly described above. For example, a helper virus or a helper plasmid can be introduced into the host cell with the rAAV vector. In this way, a rAAV virion comprising chimeric capsid polypeptides, such as chimeric capsid polypeptides comprising a fragment, domain or region of a capsid polypeptide of the present invention, may be produced. In instances where a vector library is introduced into host cells, a library of rAAV will be produced.

### Other Uses

The mAAV-EVE sequences described herein can also be used for other purposes. For example, the mAAV-EVE nucleic acid sequences, including those set forth in SEQ ID NOs:3-20, 22, 29, 32, 33, 36 or 37 can be used to detect other AAV sequences, such as other endogenous “ancestral” or “fossil” AAV sequences. This detection of other AAV sequences can be achieved using any of the methods known the art, including, but not limited to, the use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using AAV-specific primers, or the use of detectable AAV-specific oligonucleotide probes. For example, genomic DNA isolated from cells of animal can be screened for the presence of AAV sequences by PCR using PCR primers (i.e. a 5′ primer and a 3′ primer) designed using the mAAV-EVE sequences of the present disclosure. The primers have a sequence sufficiently complementary to, or the same as, a sequence flanking a target region within the sequences set forth in SEQ ID NOs:3-20, 22, 29, 32, 33, 36 or 37 such that the primers hybridize to a nucleic molecule containing the AAV target region under high, medium or low stringency conditions. In some examples, the primers have 80%, 81%, 82%, 83%, 84%, 85%, 86%, 87%, 88%, 89%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or more sequence identity to a sequence within the sequences set forth in SEQ ID NOs:3-20, 22, 29, 32, 33, 36 or 37 or a reverse, complementary sequence thereto, i.e. the sequences flanking the target region have 80%, 81%, 82%, 83%, 84%, 85%, 86%, 87%, 88%, 89%, 90%, 91%, 92%, 93%, 94%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98% or more sequence identity to a sequence within the sequences set forth in SEQ ID NOs:3-20, 22, 29, 32, 33, 36 or 37 or a reverse, complementary sequence thereto. Typically, the primers are at least 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, or 30 nucleotides in length. Generally, the primers are from 15 to 40 or from 15 to 30 nucleotides in length. These primers can therefore be used to amplify the corresponding target region in another “ancestral” or “fossil” AAV sequence present in the genomic DNA of an animal cell, i.e. used to generate amplicons containing the target region. Generally, the amplicons are between 50 and 500 nucleic acids in length, such as about 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 120, 140, 160, 180, 200, 220, 240, 260, 280, 300, 320, 340, 360, 380, 400, 420, 440, 460, 480 or 500 nucleic acids in length. In some embodiments, sequencing of the amplicons is also performed.

Thus, the present disclosure also provides a method for detecting AAV nucleotide sequences in the genomic DNA of an animal cell, comprising performing PCR on the DNA under conditions that allow for specific amplification of a target AAV region with a pair of PCR primers consisting of a first PCR primer (e.g. a 5′ primer) and a second PCR primer (e.g. a 3′ primer) that are designed to amplify the target AAV region, wherein the first PCR primer and the second PCR primer hybridize to and form a duplex with AAV sequences that flank the target AAV region, wherein the target region corresponds to a region within the sequences set forth in SEQ ID NOs:3-20, 22, 29, 32, 33, 36 or 37 and wherein the presence of amplicons containing the target region and resulting from the PCR indicates that AAV nucleotide sequences have been detected in the DNA.

The mAAV-EVE sequences of the present disclosure can also be used to assign a marsupial species to a tissue sample, i.e. determine which marsupial species selected from M. robustus, M. rufus, M. parma, M. giganteus, M. eugenii, M. rufogriseus, O. unguifea, S. brachyurus, D. goodfellowi, D. matschiei, P. lateralis, T. stigmatica, L. fasciatus, A. rufescens, P. tridactylus, and H. moschatus a tissue sample is derived from. In such methods, mAAV-EVE sequences are amplified from nucleic acid isolated from the tissue sample using AAV-specific PCR primers so as to produce an amplicon. The amplicon is then sequenced and the sequence compared to the sequences set forth in SEQ ID NOs:5-20 to determine which marsupial species the tissue sample is derived from.

In order that the invention may be readily understood and put into practical effect, particular preferred embodiments will now be described by way of the following non-limiting examples.

The reference in this specification to any prior publication (or information derived from it), or to any matter which is known, is not, and should not be taken as an acknowledgment or admission or any form of suggestion that that prior publication (or information derived from it) or known matter forms part of the common general knowledge in the field of endeavour to which this specification relates.

## EXAMPLES

### Example 1. Identification and Characterization of mAAV-EVE1 Genome and Proteins

**A. Materials and Methods**

**Sample Acquisition**

Macropus giganteus tissue samples were obtained in accordance with the provisions of a General Licence issued to the investigators by the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS, Licence number MWL000100088). All remaining samples were either collected from animals that had succumbed to road trauma, under the provision of a NPWS Scientific Licence held by the investigators (Licence number SL100022), or were available from previous studies in the form of purified genomic DNA or liver tissue samples.

Cloning and Sequencing of mAAV-EVE1 Loci

For linker-mediated “genome walking” analysis, genomic DNA was extracted from kangaroo tissue samples (liver, muscle, and brain) using a FastPrep FP120 tissue homogenizer (ThermoSavant) utilizing Lysing Matrix tubes (MP Biochemicals) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, 50-75 mg of tissue was placed in a 2-ml tube containing MP Lysing Matrix A. To each tube, 360 μl of ATL buffer with proteinase K (DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit; Qiagen) was added. Tissue was homogenized for 40 seconds at setting 5, followed by centrifugation at 10,000×g for 2 minutes to collect fluid. Samples were incubated at 56° C. for 1 hour, and then centrifuged at 10,000×g for 1 minute. Following centrifugation, 200 μl of the tissue homogenate was applied to a DNeasy column (Qiagen) and processed following the manufacturer's instructions for animal tissue. To obtain endogenous AAV sequences, approximately 0.4 μg of genomic liver DNA was subjected to PCR amplification using Platinum Taq PCR SuperMix (Invitrogen) using combinations of previously reported primer pairs recognizing conserved regions of the AAV genome (primers SIG+ and SIG− and primers AA55 and AA56). The thermal cycling conditions were 94° C. for 5 minutes followed by 35 rounds of 94° C. for 30 seconds, 55° C. for 30 seconds, and 72° C. for 30 seconds, with a final 5 minute extension at 72° C. A positive PCR result was obtained from liver DNA using the following primer pair:

“AA55” 5′-GTGCCCTTCTACGGCTGCGTCAACTGGACCAATGAGAACTTTCC-3′ (SEQ ID NO:23) and “SIG−” 5′-GAATCCCCAGTTGTTGTTGATGAGTC-3′ (SEQ ID NO:24). Upon identification of an endogenous AAV “anchor sequence”, linker-mediated “genome walking” was performed using the GenomeWalker Universal Kit (Clontech) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, kangaroo liver DNA (2.5 μg) was digested overnight in separate 100-μl reactions containing individual restriction endonucleases (e.g., DraI, NruI, ScaI, or StuI) to yield blunt-ended genomic DNA fragments. The restriction enzyme digest was then heat inactivated at 70° C. for 10 minutes, and the genomic DNA fragments were partially purified using a PCR Kleen Spin column (BioRad). A GenomeWalker kit-provided adapter was ligated to enzyme-digested genomic DNA fragments overnight at 16° C. using T4 DNA ligase. Following heat inactivation (70° C. for 10 minutes), residual adapters were removed by passage over a PCR Kleen Spin column (BioRad) according to manufacturer's instructions. Following nested PCR using unique sequence/adapter-specific primers pairs, amplified PCR products were “TA-cloned” into pCR4-TOPO (Invitrogen). Following bacterial transformation and antibiotic marker selection, individual colonies were expanded in small-scale liquid culture, and plasmid DNA was isolated for sequencing using a QIAprep Spin Kit (Qiagen).

Genomic DNA for amplification across the mAAV-EVE1 locus was extracted from liver tissue samples using either a Gentra Puregene Tissue Kit (Qiagen) or a Blood & Cell Culture DNA Kit with Genomic-tip 100/G (Qiagen), in each case following the manufacturer's protocols for DNA extraction from tissues. Amplification of the locus containing mAAV-EVE1 was initially achieved using a forward primer (AAV-EVE_flank_up, targeting the upstream flanking region: 5′-GATGTTTACAGATTAGTRTTKYATCATCAGTGCTATTTYCYCWCAAWRARRATYC C-3′; SEQ ID NO:25) containing multiple degenerate positions to accommodate phylogenetically diverse marsupials, and a reverse primer (AAVEVE_flank_dwn, targeting the downstream flanking region: 5′-AGGGAGAGTACCTATTATCTTAATTACTGTCAGACC-3′; SEQ ID NO:26). The forward primer includes a 5′ non-homologous tail to facilitate reamplification. These primers amplified the locus (irrespective of its mAAV-EVE1 occupancy) from all sampled marsupials. Later, some macropodiform mAAV-EVE1 loci were amplified using a forward primer without degenerate positions (Macr(−335)flank_up: 5′-CCTGGAATTTGTGGGTGGAAACAATGATCC-3′; SEQ ID NO: 27), specifically targeted to Macropodiformes. Amplifications were carried out using the Expand Long Template PCR System (Roche) or a LongRange PCR Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturers' instructions. Amplicons were gel-extracted using a Wizard SV Gel and PCR Clean-Up System (Promega) and cloned using the TOPO TA Cloning Kit for Sequencing, the Zero Blunt TOPO PCR Cloning Kit for Sequencing (Life Technologies; both in conjunction with One Shot TOP10 Chemically Competent E. coli cells), or the pGEM-T Easy Vector System I (Promega; in conjunction with XL10-Gold Ultracompetent Cells [Agilent]). Sanger sequencing of cloned inserts utilized primers directed against the cloning vectors, as well as internal, amplicon-specific primers, using an AB 3730xl instrument (Australian Genome Research Facility). A portion of the cloned mAAV-EVE1 sequences and “empty loci” were amplified using Platinum PCR SuperMix High Fidelity (Invitrogen) in conjunction with primers AAV-EVE_flank_up and AAVEVE _flank_dwn. Amplified sequences were cloned by direct addition of a portion of the final PCR to topo-activated pCR4-TOPO (Invitrogen) without prior gel purification. Cloned fragments were transformed into bacterial strain DH10B (Invitrogen) by electroporation following desalting in a BioRad PCR Kleen Spin column according to manufacturer's instructions. The cloned amplicons were sequenced at the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Bethesda campus core facility, or by commercial vendor.

Reconstruction of Ancestral mAAV-EVE1 Sequence

A maximum likelihood algorithm, as implemented in MEGA6.06, was used to infer ancestral mAAV-EVE1 nucleotide sequences from a multiple sequence alignment of sixteen macropodoid mAAV-EVE1 loci (M. robustus, M. rufus, M. parma, M. giganteus, M. eugenii, M. rufogriseus, O. unguifea, S. brachyurus, D. goodfellowi, D. matschiei, P. lateralis, T. stigmatica, L. fasciatus, A. rufescens, P. tridactylus, and H. moschatus: SEQ ID NOs: 5-20), with the inclusion of “empty” mAAV-EVE1 loci from related non-macropodoid marsupials (P. breviceps, P. peregrinus, S. maculatus, T. vulpecula, L. latifrons, P. cinereus, D. marsupialis, and M. domestica) serving as an outgroup. Briefly, the twenty-four member dataset was aligned using the MUSCLE multiple sequence alignment algorithm with default settings (gap open penalty=−400; gap extend penalty=0; clustering method (all iterations)=UPGMB; minimum diagonal length (lambda)=24). An isolated alignment of eight outgroup nucleotides (IUPAC nucleotide code: KGRTHACY) extant within the “empty locus” sequences (most likely representing nucleotides lost from the stem-macropodoid locus during the exogenous AAV integration event) was removed from the alignment. A short heterogeneous region of predominantly reiterated guanosine residues occurring within the 5′ portion of the mAAV-EVE rep gene was manually aligned. The most appropriate nucleotide substitution model was determined using the “Find Best DNA/Protein Models” function in MEGA, which determines the maximum likelihood fits of twenty-four evolutionary models given the data. For the mAAV-EVE1 dataset, the Tamura 3-parameter model with heterogeneity of substitution rates among sites modeled via a discrete Gamma distribution with five rate categories (i.e., T92+G) gave the lowest Bayesian Information Criterion score (33153.754), and was chosen as the best nucleotide substitution model for further analysis. A mAAV-EVE1 evolutionary tree was constructed in MEGA using the maximum likelihood (ML) method (substitution model =T92+G; gaps/missing data treatment=use all sites; ML heuristic method=nearest-neighbor interchange; initial tree for ML inference was generated automatically by maximum parsimony analysis). Most probable ancestral sequences at each node of the ML tree were exported as a “Detailed Text Export” file from the MEGA6 Tree Explorer module. The most probable ancestral sequences were extracted from the Detailed Text Export file using the command-line utility program, ExtAncSeqMEGA.exe. Due to genomic sequence deletions within mAAV-EVE1 loci occurring within the macropodoid basal taxon, H. moschatus, as well as the potoroids (A. rufescens and P. tridactylus), the full-length inferred mAAV-EVE1 sequence used for ancestral AAV modeling was derived from node 39 of the mAAV-EVE1 evolutionary tree (supplementary fig. S1), occurring at the split between Lagostrophus fasciatus and the remainder of the Macropodidae at approximately 13.8 MYA. Reading frames encoding the rep and cap genes within the inferred ancestral sequence were identified by a BLAST search of translated nucleotide databases (tblastx) for significant homology to extant AAV proteins using an ancestral mAAV-EVE1 query sequence. Using homology among the translated mAAV-EVE1 ORFs and extant dependoparvovirus protein sequence alignments as a guide, the raw mAAV-EVE1 ancestral nucleotide sequence was manually edited for frameshifts, nonsense codons, and indels. In all but one instance, frameshifts within the “raw” inferred mAAV-EVE1 nucleotide sequence could be resolved by correction based upon a non-frameshifted member of the dataset. A frameshift occurring within mAAV-EVE rep codon 242 was corrected by arbitrary insertion of a dinucleotide sequence (TT). At various positions, the inferred mAAV-EVE ancestral sequence (Node 39 sequence) was manually edited to give precedence to nucleotides encoding amino acid residues among one or more mAAV-EVE1 sequences homologous with highly conserved extant AAV protein residues.

Building a 3D Structure Model for mAAV-EVE1

The inferred mAAV-EVE1 VP3 sequence was used to generate a 3D structure model with the AAV8 VP3 structure coordinates (RCSB PDB accession No. 2QA0) supplied as a reference template to the SWISS MODEL online 3D modeling server (http://swissmodel.expasy.org/). A comparison of the mAAVEVE1 model to the AAV4 VP3 structure (RCSB PDB accession No. 2G8G) to identify VRs was conducted using the secondary structure matching (SSM) subroutine within PDBeFOld (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msdsrv/ssm/). VP3 VRs were defined as stretches of two or more sequential Ca positions that are >1 Å apart. The structures were visualized in the COOT program for further comparison of the VRs between mAAV-EVE, AAV2, AAV4, and AAV8. To enable description of the assembled mAAV-EVE1 capsid, the VP3 monomer model was used to generate a 60 mer by icosahedral matrix multiplication in the Viperdb online server (http://viperdb.scripps.edu/oligomer_multi.php). The VP3 and 60 mer coordinates were used to generate secondary structure and capsid surface images, respectively, using the PyMol program.

**A. Maximum Likelihood Sequence Reconstruction of an Ancient AAV Genome**

A maximum likelihood algorithm, as implemented in MEGA (Kumar et al. 2008), was used to infer ancestral mAAV-EVE1 sequences from a nucleotide alignment of sixteen mAAV-EVE1 loci set forth in SEQ ID NOs: 5-20. The genetic structure of the orthologous mAAV-EVE1 sequences resembles that of contemporary AAVs (FIG. 1). The average size of the “full-length” mAAV-EVE1 virus-derived sequence was approximately 4.4 kbp. The representatives of the family Potoroidae (A. rufescens and P. tridactylus) bore internal deletions of approximately 1.2 kbp, whereas the EVE recovered from H. moschatus (the sole extant member of the family Hypsiprymnodontidae) displayed an internal deletion of 1.6 kbp. Additional minor indels were distributed throughout the various mAAV-EVE1 sequences. The average GC-content of full-length, virus-derived mAAV-EVE1 sequences is approximately 43%, compared to approximately 56%, 54%, and 46% for representative extant primate AAVs (serotypes 1 through 6), avian AAVs (strains DA1 and VR-865), and the goose/Muscovy duck parvoviruses, respectively. The majority of the nucleotide substitutions were single base substitutions. The rep gene of the inferred ancestral mAAV-EVE1 genomic sequence contained three frameshift mutations and five nonsense codons (FIG. 1c). A heterogeneous region of repeated guanosine residues among the mAAV-EVE1 orthologs (resolved to glycine codons 146 and 147 of the inferred mAAV-EVE1 rep ORF) was recalcitrant to unambiguous alignment and was manually edited. The mAAV-EVE1 cap gene of the inferred genome contained three nonsense codons as well as two frameshift mutations (FIG. 1c). A putative TATA box approximately 90 bp upstream of the rep ORF and a putative polyadenylation signal (AATAAA) approximately 40 bp downstream of the cap ORF were identified in locations similar to those mapped in extant AAV genomes. A potential polyadenylation signal was also observed between the rep and cap genes of the mAAV-EVE1 sequences. A similarly located polyadenylation signal occurs within extant primate AAV genomes, and has been shown to be utilized in AAV5 (Qiu et al. 2004. J Virol 78:83-93.). ITR sequences were not identified.

To ascertain potential binding sites for known transcription factors and to compare the structure of the mAAV-EVE NS1 promoter to that of an extant dependoparvovirus, the 216-nt sequence extending from the left end of the mAAV-EVE genome to the start codon of the NS1 open reading frame and the equivalent 175-nt region of the AAV2 P5 promoter were analyzed using the web-based software application TFBIND (http://tfbind.hgc.jp). This identified ˜300 transcription factor binding site motifs within each promoter (314 motifs within the AAV2 P5 promoter and 297 motifs within the mAAV-EVE NS1 promoter, each with some degree of binding site signature redundancy). The two promoters shared 77 of the transcription factor binding site signature motifs. Notably, putative binding sites for two transacting factors shown to be important for the transcriptional regulation of the AAV2 P5 promoter, viz. YY1 and MLTF/USF, occur at similar locations within each promoter. Similar to the AAV2 P5 promoter, a potential YY1 binding site was identified approximately 25 bp downstream of the putative TATA box of the mAAV-EVE NS1 promoter (although the upstream “−60” YY1 site was not identified). In addition, a potential binding site for MLTF/USF was identified approximately 60 bp upstream of the putative TATA box of the mAAV-EVE1 NS1 promoter, a location similar to the MLTF/USF site mapped approximately 50 bp upstream of the TATA box of the AAV2 P5 promoter (Chang et al. 1989. J Virol 63:3479-88). Potential binding sites for equivalents of the AAV2 P19 and P40 promoters were not analyzed owing to ambiguity as to the potential location of these gene embedded promoters in the absence of transcript mapping data.

Equivalents of the major nonstructural, replication initiator protein (Rep78) and major coat protein (VP3) encoded by the prototypical AAV species (AAV2) were readily apparent (FIG. 1d). The existence of a methionine codon at an equivalent position to the AAV2 Rep52/40 ORF suggests that the exogenous ancestor of mAAV-EVE1 encoded at least one amino-terminally truncated Rep protein. A start codon at an equivalent position to the AAV2 VP1 protein suggests that the ancestral exogenous virus also encoded a VP1-like molecule. An ACG codon at an equivalent position to that utilized by AAV2 for the translational initiation of the VP2 protein was not observed. However, subsequent comparison to other capsid sequences indicated that the VP2 protein initiates at the codon encoding position 132 with a leucyl-tRNA CTG start codon, such that the mAAV-EVE1 VP2 coding sequence is set forth in SEQ ID NO:36.

**B. Characterisation of the Rep Protein**

The overlapping polypeptides encoded by the AAV rep gene (FIG. 1) are pleiotropic transacting factors shown to possess the nuclease and helicase activities required for initiation (and possibly termination) of AAV DNA replication, as well as packaging of nascent viral genomes. Translation of the mAAV-EVE1 rep open reading frame (ORF) set forth in SEQ ID NO:22) yields an acidic 581 amino acid protein (SEQ ID NO:21; estimated pI 5.2) with a predicted molecular weight of approximately 67.6 kilo daltons (kDa).

A BLAST search of the NCBI non-redundant protein sequences database (nr), using the mAAV-EVE1 Rep protein as a query sequence, identified two conserved protein domains: i) an amino-terminal RepN superfamily catalytic domain associated with DNA binding and ssDNA endonuclease activity; and ii) a central parvovirus_NS1 superfamily domain associated with nucleoside triphosphate hydrolysis and helicase activity (FIG. 2a). The carboxy-terminal domain of mAAV-EVE1 Rep appears unique, with no significant similarity to known protein domains. The top four homologous Rep proteins identified by the BLAST search were encoded by bovine AAV (max score =548), primate AAV5 (max score=543), goat AAV-Go. 1 (max score=542), and avian AAV strain DA-1 (max score=542), respectively. Amino acid alignment of AAV5, AAV2 and mAAV-EVE1 Rep proteins shows retention of clearly identifiable Rolling Circle Replication (RCR) motifs II and III in the N-terminal nuclease domain of the mAAV-EVE1 Rep protein (FIG. 2b). Similar to extant dependoparvovirus Rep proteins, RCR motif I was not apparent. RCR motif II, known as the HUH motif, consists of two invariant histidine residues (positions 95 and 97 of the mAAV-EVE1 Rep protein) embedded within a patch of bulky hydrophobic amino acids (typically uHuHuuu, where u represents a hydrophobic residue).

The crystal structure of the nuclease domain of the AAV5 Rep protein has been solved (Hickman et al. 2002. Rep. Mol Cell 10:327-337). Modeling of the mAAV-EVE1 Rep nuclease domain on a template of AAV5 nuclease atomic coordinates indicates remarkable conservation of domain structure. The AAV Rep nuclease domain fold consists of a five-stranded anti-parallel beta sheet bearing the conserved RCR motifs sandwiched between flanking alpha helical clusters (FIG. 2c). The modeled mAAV-EVE1 Rep nuclease domain shows a high degree of structural similarity to the extant AAV5 domain (QMEAN z-score −0.11), including the juxtaposition of the catalytic RCR motifs within the central cleft of the domain (FIG. 2c). Hickman et al. (2002) noted an acidic 38-amino acid loop between beta strand β1 and alpha helix αB that was a distinctive feature of the AAV5 nuclease domain (FIG. 2c). Although the two regions only share four aligned acidic residues, the relatively large excess negative charge of the loop region is conserved among the mAAV-EVE1 and AAV5 Rep proteins.

The Superfamily 3 helicase domain fold, conserved among extant AAVs and other parvoviruses, was readily apparent within mAAV-EVE1 Rep residues 210 to 495, as were the conserved “Walker motifs” involved in nucleotide triphosphate binding and hydrolysis. The lysine residue of the highly conserved GKT triplet within the Walker A site was substituted with an asparagine residue in the inferred mAAVEVE1 Rep protein. There appears to be no precedent for this substitution in other Walker A site-containing nucleoside triphosphatases. Notably, amino acid substitutions at critical positions of known catalytic sites (e.g., the essential lysine residue of the Rep helicase Walker A site, the catalytic tyrosine residue of the DNA cleavage domain, and the invariant histidine residue of the VP1 phospholipase A2 domain) were observed in many of the individual mAAV-EVE1 Rep and Cap protein sequences. This pattern suggests that expression of active proteins from the endogenized viral sequence could be disadvantageous to host cell function and/or proliferation resulting in selection of function-inactivating mutations.

**C. Characterisation of the Capsid Protein**

The mAAV-EVE1 capsid gene is a 2196 polynucleotide (SEQ ID NO:3) that, as shown in FIG. 3, encodes a VP1-like protein (SEQ ID NO:1), and a VP3-like protein (SEQ ID NO:2). The VP2-like protein is predicted to span residues 132-731 of the VP1 capsid protein and therefore comprised a sequence set forth in SEQ ID NO:34.

A phospholipase A2 domain (PLA2: amino acid residues 41-100 of SEQ ID NO:1) required for parvovirus infectivity (Zadori et al. 2001. Dev Cell 1L291-302) was conserved within mAAV-EVE1 VP1. However, the otherwise invariant histidine residue at position 71 within the catalytic site of the domain was substituted with a glutamine in mAAV-EVE1 VP1.

Analysis of the mAAV-EVE1 VP3 sequence using BLAST and sequence alignment with AAV2, AAV4, and AAV8 using Clustal W showed the highest sequence identity to AAV2 and AAV8 at ˜61% compared to ˜55% to AAV4. However, when the SWISS MODEL online subroutine was used to build a VP3 3D structure model for mAAV-EVE1 with AAV2 and AAV8 as reference templates, identities of 63.9% and 65.4%, respectively, were reported. Accordingly, the AAV8-based model was used for further analysis.

As has been observed for all the other AAV structures available, the VP3 monomer contains an eight-stranded 3-barrel core (βBIDG-CHEF) and the β-strand A with variable loops (in sequence and structure) inserted between the strands and a small a-helix (αA) (FIG. 4). The placement of known regions of amino acid variability associated with surface loops (regions I through IX) were consistent with those of extant AAV capsids (FIG. 4a). These regions are located at or near the exterior surface of the VP3 monomer (FIG. 4a). Interestingly, VR-VII was substantially larger in mAAV-EVE1 compared to AAV2 and AAV8 (FIG. 3). The mAAV-EVE1 capsid, assembled from 60 copies of the VP3 common region of the VP, conserves the characteristic features of the AAVs: a depression at the icosahedral 2-fold axis, three protrusions surrounding an icosahedral 3-fold axis, a channel at the icosahedral 5-fold axis, and an HI loop (between βH and βI) lining a depression surrounding the 5-fold channel. The VRs cluster on the mAAV-EVE1 capsid surface to create local surface topology differences compared to other AAVs (FIG. 6b). For example, the larger VR-VII is located at the base of the 3-fold protrusions and extends into the depression surrounding the 5-fold channel creating a unique surface topology in mAAVEVE1. These VRs control several AAV functions, including receptor attachment, trafficking phenotypes, transduction efficiency, and antigenic reactivity (Parrish 2010. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 343:149-176; Halder et al. 2012. Future Virol 7:253-278).

An AAG-initiated open reading frame encoding a potential assembly-activating protein (AAP: SEQ ID NO:29) homolog, a protein involved in AAV capsid assembly (Sonntag et al. (2010) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:10220-10225), was embedded within the cap gene (FIG. 1d). Assuming that, similar to numerous extant AAVs, translational initiation of the AAP ORF begins at a non-canonical CTG codon (Naumer et al. 2012. J Virol 86:13038-13048; Pénzes et al. 2015. J Gen Virol 96:2769-2779), the putative mAAV-EVE AAP is 201 amino acids in length with a molecular weight of approximately 21.6 kDa and a predicted pI of 8.30 (SEQ ID NO:28). The protein sequence demonstrates evolutionarily-conserved characteristic features of the AAP family, including a conserved core sequence flanked by hydrophobic and proline-rich regions respectively, followed by a region rich in serine/threonine residues (Naumer et al.(2012) J Virol 86:13038-13048; Pénzes et al. (2015) J Gen Virol 96:2769-2779).

### Example 2. Modification of mAAV-EVE Capsid

The mAAV-EVE1 capsid protein was modified in silico to include residues that were evolutionarily conserved between phylogenetically divergent AAV serotypes. Positions within the mAAV-EVE1 capsid sequence set forth ion SEQ ID NO:1 that were not in agreement with the conserved sequences were evaluated, and changed where deemed appropriate, based on tiered criteria: 1) if any of the individual macropodiform AAV-EVE sequences (from which mAAV-EVE1 was deduced, i.e. polypeptides encoded by SEQ ID NOs:5-20) supported the conserved sequence, the corresponding residue was changed; 2) if criterion 1 did not apply, but additional contemporary/extant marsupial AAV sequences supported the conserved sequence, the corresponding residue was changed; 3) if neither criterion 1 nor 2 applied, but a single nucleotide substitution could be used to effect an amino acid change to match the conserved sequence, the corresponding residue was changed. Residues that were not in agreement with conserved positions but could not be changed in accordance with any of the three criteria above were left unchanged.

The above process produced the mAAV-EVE1 capsid protein (VP1) set forth in SEQ ID NO:30, which has 96.17% sequence identity to the originally-deduced mAAV-EVE1 capsid polypeptide set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 (see FIG. 5). An exemplary encoding capsid gene is set forth in SEQ ID NO:32. The VP3 of this deduced, modified mAAV-EVE1 capsid is set forth in SEQ ID NO:31 (exemplary encoding polynucleotide set forth in SEQ ID NO: 33), and the VP2 is set forth in SEQ ID NO:35 (exemplary encoding polynucleotide set forth in SEQ ID NO: 37).

### Example 3. Production of rAAV

The mAAV-EVE1 cap gene set forth in SEQ ID NO:1 or SEQ ID NO:30 is cloned into an AAV2 Rep-expressing plasmid, downstream of the rep gene. This plasmid is co-transfected into HEK293T cells with a transgene plasmid (AAV vector) containing AAV ITRs flanking the GFP gene and pAd5 in a ratio of 1:1:3 using polyethylenimine (PEI) The plasmids are added to 80-90% confluent HEK293 cells in 10% DMEM+1% penicillin/streptomycin. Briefly, for each plate of cells, DNA is to pre-warmed OptiMem medium (final volume 250 μL; 7.5 μg Rep+Cap-expressing plasmid: 7.5 μg AAV vector: 22.5 pAd5). 150 μL PEI (1 μg/μL in 1×PBS pH 4.5) is added to 100 μL pre-warmed OptiMem (4:1 ratio of PEI:DNA) and briefly vortexed (10 sec). Both solutions are mixed, vortexed briefly and left for 10 min at room temperature. Cells are harvested at 72 hours post transfection by washing the plates with the media in the plate. Cells are pooled in 2×500-mL Corning tubes and centrifuged for 15 min at 3800 rpm.

The supernatant is moved to new 500-mL tubes and the cell pellets are re-suspended in 30-40 mL benzonase buffer. The supernatant is centrifuged again before being transferred into a 1000-mL single use bottle, and ¼ volume 40% PEG in 2.5 M NaCl is added. The supernatant/PEG solution is incubated on ice for at least 3 hrs before being mixed and moved into 500-mL Corning tubes. The tube is centrifuged for 30 min at 3800 rpm at 4° C. and the resulting PEG pellet is resuspended in 20 mL 1×cracking buffer by rotating the tube at 4° C. overnight. This preparation is maintained at 4° C. for further AAV purification (below).

The cells are lysed using 3 freeze-thaw cycles. The cell suspension is frozen in dry ice/EtOH and the tube is placed in a 37° C. water bath until the cells are completely thawed. After the second thaw, benzonase enzyme is added at 200 U/ml and the cells are frozen again before being thawed a third time with benzonase. After 1 hr incubation at 37° C., the cells are spun at 3000-4000 rpm for 15 min to pellet the cell debris, and the supernatant is transferred to a new tube. To the supernatant, 1/39th volume 1 M CaCl2 is added to obtain a 25 mM CaCl2 final solution, which is then kept on ice for 1 hour. The solution is centrifuged at maximum speed for 30 min at 4° C. and the supernatant is added to a new tube. One quarter volume 40% PEG-8000/2.5 M NaCl (final 8% PEG) is added and mixed well before the tube is incubated on ice for at least 3 hrs. The solution is centrifuged at maximum speed for 30 min at 4° C. and the supernatant is discarded. The pellet is resuspended in 10 ml NaHepes/EDTA resuspension buffer, to which a further 10 ml more buffer is added before being left overnight at 4° C. shaking.

To purify the AAV from the cell pellet preparation and the supernatant preparation, each preparation is treated as follows: Twelve mL of 1.3 g/mL CsCl in PBS is added to a 30 ml SW28 tube. A further 5 mL of 1.5 g/mL CsCl in PBS is added to the bottom of the tube to establish a clear interface. To this, 20-22 mL of virus suspension is slowly added at the top. The tube is centrifuged and at 28K (104,000×g) at 20° C. for 24 hrs and the virus band at the interface is collected using a 10-mL syringe/18G needle. The virus suspension is pooled and a second CsCl gradient is performed by adjusting the suspension to 1.37 g/mL CsCl in PBS centrifuging at 38K for 24 hrs. Full virions are then collected by sealing the top of the tube with Parafilm and collect 0.5-mL fractions by piercing the bottom of the tube. The presence of rAAV in each fraction is confirmed by SDS gel and qPCR on 1 μl from each dilution for each fraction, and the fractions with full rAAV are pooled.

The rAAV is the dialysed with PBS pH 7.4 using Slide-a-lyzer dialysis cassettes (10,000 MWCO, 0.5-3.0 ml capacity: Pierce) at 4° C. Briefly, the cassette is pre-wet in the buffer for at least 2 min, with foam float and rAAV is added to the cassette with 1 mL pipette using the pipette port. The rAAV is dialysed in PBS for 2 hrs or overnight, then in fresh PBS for 2 hrs. A third dialysis for 2 hrs in PBS/5% sorbitol is performed before the rAAV is removed from the cassette using a syringe. The virus is filtered through a 0.22-m syringe filter into a 15-ml Falcon tube or 5-mL Eppendorf tube and stores at −80° C.

### Example 4. Assessment of rAAV

The functionality of the rAAV containing the mAAV-EVE1 capsid polypeptides is assessed by transducing human and mouse cells with the rAAV and determining capsid tropism. Briefly, a panel of human cell lines representing the broadest possible range of tissues is transduced with a vector encoding GFP and packaged using the mAAV-EVE capsid. GFP expression is then assessed by fluorescence microscopy and by FACS. For mouse cell targeting, C57BL/6 mice are injected via the tail vein with a similar vector encoding both luciferase and GFP, separated by a 2A peptide sequence. Whole-body bioluminescent imaging is used to detect luciferase expression, while specific tissues from sacrificed mice are assessed for GFP expression by fluorescence microscopy and FACS.

