# INTRODUCTION

Gene replacement strategies in clinical trials for retinal degenerative diseases were designed to compensate for the biallelic inheritance of recessive, loss-of-function mutations. 1 This approach, however, is inapplicable to autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) in which disease penetrance is conferred by a monoallelic, gain-of-function mutation. 2 Twenty-four genes have been implicated in adRP etiology, with Rho variations constituting the highest proportion of RP cases. 3 Studies in transgenic animals bearing dominant Rho mutations showed that disease severity can be mitigated by silencing the mutant RNA transcript 4,5 or via transcriptional suppression using an allele-independent approach to target both mutant and wild-type genes. 6 The caveat to these approaches, however, is the requisite supplementation with the wild-type Rho (Rho WT ) transcript.

Allele-specific genomic ablation using Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeat (CRISPR)/Cas9 may present a simplified therapeutic strategy in which retinal function is restored by the remaining Rho WT allele in adRP patients. Though two Rho WT alleles will remain following transgene ablation in the model used here, patient hemizygosity does not manifest in haploinsufficiency as Rho WT expression between 50 and 200% is clinically asymptomatic. 2 Moreover, as little as 10% of total Rho expression from a control transgene was shown to be sufficient to reconstitute the WT phenotype in Rho knockout mice. 7 Accordingly, adRP may be amenable to allele-specific ablation therapy without requiring exogenous Rho WT supplementation.

Transgenic S334ter rats that possess the mouse genomic fragment containing Rho S334 show phenotypic similarity to human class-I RHO mistrafficking mutations, exhibiting continual photoreceptor (PR) loss and commensurate vision decline. 8 The S334ter mutation generates a serine substitution at amino acid position 334/338 for a stop codon resulting in early termination ("ter"), and RHO truncation by 15 C-terminal residues. 3 The resultant peptide (RHO S334 ) lacks three serines required for PR deactivation following light stimulation, 9 and part of the signal sequence required for RHO trafficking to photoreceptor outer segments (POS). 10 The morphological development of POS is critical to support phototransduction 11 and is absent in line-3 S334ter rats (S334ter-3). 12 As RHO constitutes ~85% of the total protein content in PRs, its retention in processing organelles at the cell body instigates PR toxicity and is compounded by constitutive PR activity, resulting in apoptosis. 13 We hypothesized that the selective ablation of Rho S334 in vivo would eliminate the RHO S334 production and toxicity and allow native Rho WT to restore the phenotype to that of the nondystrophic retina. We used CRISPR/Cas9 to selectively disrupt Rho S334 by utilizing the requirement of Cas9 activity on the recognition of a protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) present in Rho S334 , which diverges from the Rho WT sequence by one nucleotide (5′-TGG-3′ versus 5′-TGC-3′, respectively). Here, we show that this single base pair difference facilitated discrimination between Rho alleles during Cas9 cleavage, which permitted the unabated function of Rho WT to prevent RP pathology and loss of visual acuity.

# RESULTS

## Differential distribution of RHO S334 versus RHO WT in

S334ter-3 rats S334ter-3 rats are characterized by the rapid and progressive loss of PRs in the outer nuclear layer (ONL) beginning at postnatal day (P) 11, until complete degeneration is reached by P28, at which time just a single row of PR nuclei remain. 12 Similarly, S334ter-3 rat retinas showed near full ONL thickness at P14 (Supplementary Figure S1a, bracketed areas), compared with a single discontinuous row of remaining PR nuclei at P33 (Supplementary Figure S1c, bracketed areas). As previously described for line-4 S334 rats, RHO N-terminal immunolabel identified both the truncated (RHO S334 ) and full-length (RHO WT ) isoforms. However, RHO C-terminal-specific immunolabel exclusively identified the RHO WT isoform. 14 Immunolabeled N-terminal RHO in P14 S334ter-3 retinas was predominantly mislocalized at PR cell bodies throughout the ONL, while RHO WT was present in the ONL and polarized toward PR inner segments (Supplementary Figure S1a versus S1b). The consequence of RHO mistrafficking by P33 was the degeneration of PRs in the ONL, which consisted of a single discontinuous layer of PR nuclei (Supplementary Figure S1c,d). FACS gating strategy for mCherry + MSC S334 isolation is shown. mCherry + cells represented 12% of the total population, with the brightest 3.4% mCherry + MSCs S334 selected for genomic DNA sequence analysis using PCR amplicons encompassing predicted Cas9 cleavage sites. (e-h) Genomic DNA sequencing results are shown with Phred quality scores (gray shading) at bottom. DNA disruption is shown from gRNA TRGT -transfected MSCs S334 downstream from the Cas9 cleavage site (blue highlight) in Rho S334 (e), but not in Rho WT (f). Genomic disruption was absent at the Rho S334 locus using gRNA CNTRL (g) or with no vector in untreated eyes (h). Bar = 400 µm. CMV, cytomegalovirus; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; PAM, protospacer adjacent motif. 

## Guide RNA vector design and strategy

We designed a 20 nucleotide targeting-guide RNA (gRNA) construct (gRNA TRGT ) complementary to a region in exon 1 immediately upstream of a PAM unique to the Rho S334 locus in order to discriminate alleles during Cas9 cleavage (Figure 1a,b). The homology between mutant and WT Rho alleles at the gRNA binding locus differs by one nucleotide at position 10/20 (Figure 1b). gRNA TRGT targeted the second of four PAMs identified as unique to Rho S334 to give the greatest probability for allele-specific ablation. We reasoned that 3′ open reading frame disruptions downstream to the two PAMs in exon 4 risked generating further truncated RHO isoforms, while targeting the 5′-most PAM of exon 1 risked Rho S334 open reading frame restoration as a consequence of polymerase skipping. While the S334ter mutation was not the target of our gRNA TRGT , dominant adRP mutations have been identified in patients that generated novel PAM sequences 15 that may be targetable similar to the current strategy (Supplementary Table S1).

### Rho S334 disruption in vitro

RhoS334-selective cleavage with gRNA TRGT was confirmed in cultured bone marrow-derived stromal cells derived from S334ter-3 rats (MSCs S334 ). mCherry + MSCs S334 were isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting 3 days after transfection (Figure 1c,d), and PCR-amplified regions of genomic DNA that encompassed the predicted Cas9 cleavage sites were sequenced. Multiple peaks and decreased nucleotide read fidelity (Phred quality scores) indicated the presence of novel genomic sequences originating downstream from the disparate PAM of Rho S334 , which was absent at the homologous Rho WT locus (Figure 1e,f). Genomic disruption was not observed using a second gRNA that targeted exon 2 of Rho S334 , which had four nucleotide mismatches from Rho WT , and was thus used as a control gRNA (gRNA CNTRL ) for in vivo experiments (Figure 1g). Likewise, genomic disruption was not observed in cells from untreated retinas (Figure 1h). 

## Rho S334 disruption in vivo

To evaluate Rho S334 disruption in vivo, S334ter-3 rats received a single unilateral subretinal injection of the gRNA TRGT construct at P0 (Figure 2a), immediately followed by electroporation in order to facilitate plasmid uptake by PRs in cell cycle. 16 Retinas were dissociated at P4 and plasmid-transfected cells were sorted on the basis of mCherry expression (Figure 2b,c), followed by genomic DNA extraction for Sanger sequencing. We confirmed multiple genomic sequences resulting from Rho S334 -selective cleavage downstream the Cas9 cleavage site (blue highlight) in P4 mCherry + PRs (Figure 2d), but no cleavage was detected at the Rho WT locus (Figure 1e). Genomic cleavage was similar in PRs that expressed mCherry at high (mCherry Hi ) or intermediate/low (mCherry Lo ) levels in three rats (Supplementary Figure S2). PCR-amplified genomic DNA regions encompassing the gRNA TRGT target site were further sequenced after clonal expansion in NEB-α to determine indel frequency. The ratio of clones in which indels were detected from two rats represented cleavage efficiencies of 33% (7/21 clones) and 36% (15/42 clones). Indels were not detected at the Rho WT locus or the next 8 motif-mismatch-predicted off-target loci (Supplementary Table S2). Similarly, histological evaluation using cresyl violet stain showed phenotypic rescue by gRNA TRGT treatment compared with the contralateral untreated eye of the same animal (Supplementary Figure S3a,c versus S3b,d).

## PR preservation following Rho S334 ablation

To determine whether the retinal phenotype was altered in S334ter-3 rats, gRNA TRGT and gRNA CNTRL treatments were assessed by immunohistology at P33. Extensive and robust retinal preservation was observed in gRNA TRGT -injected eyes with up to eight layers of rescued PRs, in sharp contrast to the single PR layer in gRNA CNTRL -treated retinas (Figure 3a-c versus 3d,e). PR rescue was observed exclusively in transfected regions demonstrated by coincident mCherry expression, which were the only regions with observable POS formation, morphologically characteristic of the WT phenotype that was absent in gRNA CNTRL -injected eyes (Figure 3d,e). Furthermore, N-terminal RHO labeling confirmed the absence of RHO S334 from PR cell bodies in the rescued ONL (Figure 3b), while C-terminal labeling showed RHO WT to be strictly confined to POS (Figure 3c). These data suggest that Rho S334 was ablated and the toxic effect of RHO S334 was removed in transfected regions, which subsequently permitted proper RHO WT trafficking, POS formation, and PR survival. gRNA CNTRL -treated retinas lacked appreciable amounts of either RHO isoform at P33 due to extensive degeneration (Figure 3d,e).

## Retinal synapse preservation following Rho S334 ablation

Immunostaining of degenerated gRNA CNTRL -treated retinas revealed that the single layer of remaining PRs were non-Rho-expressing cone cells (Figure 4a,d), the morphology of which was well preserved with gRNA TRGT treatment (Figure 4e,h). mCherry fluorescence intensity in PRs appeared highest in mitochondria-rich inner segments (Figure 4g). In addition, gRNA TRGT treatment preserved the dendritic arborization of rod-bipolar cells (protein kinase C-α, Figure 4i) and synaptic density between second-order 

## Quantification of PR density and visual function in Rho S334 -treated retinas

The extent of mCherry distribution in retinal flat-mounts at P33 reached 29% maximal area coverage, with uneven fluorescence intensity in transfected regions (Figure 5a). By cross-section analysis, the density of PRs in mCherry + regions from gRNA TRGT treatment at P33 was 307 ± 82 PR nuclei/100 µm or ninefold greater than from gRNA CNTRL treatment (33 ± 3 nuclei/100 µm, P ≤ 0.01) and was similarly higher when compared with comparable regions (nonfluorescent) of untreated control (27 ± 13 nuclei/100 µm, P ≤ 0.01). The density of PR nuclei was not different between gRNA CNTRL and untreated groups (P = 0.41) (Figure 5b).

Visual acuity assessed at P39 by optokinetic response was 53% higher from gRNA TRGT compared with that of gRNA CNTRL treatment (0.185 versus 0.121 cycles/degree, respectively; Figure 5c). By using the contralateral eye of individual animals as internal controls, visual acuity was 35% higher in the gRNA TRGT -treated eye compared with the fellow eye in individual animals, whereas, gRNA CNTRL -injection reduced visual acuity by 2.3% compared to the contralateral untreated eye (Figure 5d).

# DISCUSSION

These data collectively provide proof of principle for in vivo allele-specific ablation using CRISPR/Cas9 to prevent inherited retinal degeneration. The selective ablation of Rho S334 had prevented RHO S334 accumulation at PR cell bodies in the ONL and restored RHO WT trafficking to outer segments, which prevented retinal degeneration and preserved visual acuity. Eliminating RHO S334 expression generated blunt transition areas at which markedly preserved retinal areas adjoined those with advanced degeneration. These transition regions likely represent the physical extent to which gRNA TRGT transfection had reached, as mCherry expression shared the same demarcation (Figures 3a andFigures 4i,j ). The observation that mCherry expression was not observed in all rescued PRs is likely attributable to the episomal nature of the plasmids and the reduced efficiency of the cytomegalovirus promoter (driving mCherry) compared to that of Chicken β-actin-derivative (driving Cas9). 17 Thus, mCherry expression likely underestimated the total number of PRs in which Cas9/gRNA TRGT was active and therefore the number of PRs in which the Rho S334 ablation-mediated rescue had occurred. This assertion is consistent with the S334ter-3 model, in which the expression of Rho S334 is exclusive to (rod) PRs and instigates cell autonomous apoptotic signaling, suggesting that Rho S334 ablation is the only manner by which phenotypic rescue could have been achieved with gRNA TRGT treatment. Furthermore, since PRs possess a single copy of the Rho S334 transgene, its ablation is absolute for conferring PR survivability. Whether this permanent genomic change confers long-term PR survival in a degenerative milieu will require sequential analysis of gRNA TRGT -treated retinas. Toward this goal, PR loss was shown to be halted in an inducible transgenic model of autosomal recessive RP, even at advanced stages of degeneration. 18 Furthermore, a translational proof-of-concept study using gene replacement in a canine model of X-lined RP demonstrated the feasibility of long-term arrest of PR loss. 19 These studies support the possibility of long-term vision rescue following in vivo gene correction.

With regard to visual function assessment, optomotor reflexes were significantly preserved from a single gRNA TRGT treatment 39 days prior, compared with controls. Differences in visual function were not detected by electroretinography, however, electroretinography sensitivity is limited for detecting focal retinal activity and may not represent an appropriate test for our experimental approach. Translational limitations of the current methods are technical in nature and greater functional improvement may be obtained through alternative methods to maximize retinal transfection and genetic correction. For example, the use of shorter Cas9 orthologs, such as Staphylococcus aureus (~3.3 kb) 20,21 with short universal tRNA promoter, 22 will allow for efficient vector packaging into adeno-associated viral particles. Alternatively, direct delivery of Cas9 protein/gRNA complexes in vivo would also minimize the duration of endonuclease activity and therefore the risk for off-target cleavage events without compromising targeted cleavage efficiency, 23 a critical consideration in the context of using genomic ablation as therapy.

The first in vivo functional correction of an inherited dominant mutation using CRISPR, shown here, provides proof-of-concept that CRISPR/Cas9 can be used to treat inherited adRP. Selective ablation of a dominant allele was achieved by targeting a PAM unique to the Rho S334 transgene, which differed from the Rho WT sequence by a single nucleotide. adRP-linked missense mutations that likewise create targetable monoallelic PAM sequences have been identified in patients (Supplementary Table S1), who may thus represent the candidate population for ablation therapy to achieve phenotypic rescue. The challenge of generating targeted therapies for diseases with mutational heterogeneity may be addressed by altering the PAM specificity of Cas through rational-design engineering 24 or by using noncanonical Cas enzymes. 25 Such efforts may broaden the number of targetable mutations and, thereby, expand the treatable pool of patients with degenerative diseases of the retina, and possibly other tissues.

# MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cas9/gRNA vector design. gRNAs were cloned into px330 vectors (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) via BbsI restriction enzyme sites upstream of the scaffold gRNA sequence and the mCherry reporter (Addgene, Cambridge, MA) was cloned downstream of the Cas9 transcript, which was under constitutive expression by cytomegalovirus promoter.  Visual function assessment. Animals were tested for spatial visual acuity by OptoMotry testing apparatus (CerebralMechanics, Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada) as previously described, 28 in which four computer monitors are arranged in a square to project a 3D virtual space of a rotating cylinder lined with vertical sine wave grating. Unrestrained animals on a center platform tracked the projected image of rotating grating with reflexive head movements. The spatial frequency of the grating (cycles per degree) was centered on the rats' viewing position, and maximal acuity ascertained by increasing the grating frequency at psychophysics staircase progression until the tracking response was lost.

Statistical significance. Student's t-tests were performed using two-tailed distribution, and two-sample unequal variance (heteroscedastic) to compare optokinetic response cycles/degree values from treated versus untreated eyes of individual animals, as well as between animals of treatment groups; gRNA TRGT (N = 5) and gRNA CNTRL (N = 4). Contralateral noninjected eyes served as untreated controls. Error bars indicate standard error mean. Statistical significance: **P ≤ 0.01, † † P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Lin Shen of Regenerative Medicine Institute for experimental assistance, Laura Dieu and Patricia Lin of the Cedars-Sinai Flow Cytometry Core, and Seigo Hatada and Soshana Svendsen for manuscript review. Financial support was provided by the Cedars-Sinai Board of Governors Regenerative Medicine Institute, Fight for Sight Foundation (FFS-PD-14-053.R1), and NEI (EY020488). S.W., B.L., W.L., and B.B. are coinventors on US provisional patent applications 62/149,468 and 62/147,981; W.L. conceived of the project; B.B. assembled the figures and drafted the manuscript; W.L., B.B., and S.W. designed and conducted experiments; K.J.K., B.L., Y.T., and M.K.J. conducted experiments; R.L. and A.A.A. assisted with electroporation; J.J.B. provided reagents and use of equipment; and C.N.S. provided funding and critical review.

