# INTRODUCTION

Boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs) have gained significant interest owing to their excellent chemical, mechanical, and thermal properties. BNNTs exhibit high neutron absorption for 10 B, high tensile strength with axial Young's modulus up to 1.3 TPa, thermal stability in air up to 900 • C, and uniform wide band gap ranging between 5 and 6 eV, regardless of chirality and diameter. [1][2][3][4] Recent researches have taken advantage of these distinct properties, especially for extreme conditions application. For target aerospace missions, BNNTs have been explored as reinforcement in polymers to improve their mechanical strength, thermal stability, and neutron-absorbing ability for added protection in satellites and spacesuits. [5] BNNTs exhibit piezo-electric property and have been applied as nanofillers for flexible sensors to withstand harsh environments. [6,7] BNNTs have also been used as an effective reinforcement for metal matrix composites. [8] So far, the applications of BNNTs are far less imagined compared to their well-studied carbon nanotubes (CNTs) counterpart, mainly due to the low purity of mass-produced BNNTs and the low selectivity in dispersing BNNTs containing other impurities in almost all solvents. [9][10][11] Recent BNNT bulk-production methods produced tubes with a significant amount of impurities containing boron and its oxides, and different forms of boron nitride (BN), most distinguishably hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), which has been proven difficult to remove due to its chemical resemblance with BNNT. [10,12] Moreover, S C H E M E 1 BNNTs were purified directly (red arrow, →) without prior heat treatment via mixing followed by centrifugation in the polymer-organic solvent systems. Previously reported purification involves heat-treatment before dispersion (black arrow, →) various researches have focused on the functionalization of the tube's surface with polymers, surfactants, and peptides or biomolecules to enhance its dispersibility in a wide range of solvents. [11,[13][14][15] This is necessary for the fabrication of BNNT-based nanocomposites with optimum performance that strongly depends on the uniformity and homogeneity of the nanotubes in the matrix.

The functionalization of BNNTs can be done via covalent or non-covalent modifications. Covalent functionalization offers higher reactivity and stability due to the functional moieties chemically introduced to the tube; however, this process alters the intrinsic properties of BNNTs because of significant structural damage during the chemical reactions. [16,17] Hence, non-covalent functionalization is more preferred, employing a simplistic and less destructive approach while maintaining their inherent characteristics. [13] The π-conjugated rings of B = N structure in BNNTs make it possible for small, big, or long molecules to bond non-covalently on its surface via π-interactions. Early studies on the functionalization of BNNTs have used aromatic polymers like poly(m-phenylene-co-2,5-dioctoxy-pphenylenevinylene) (PmPV) to form dispersion in organic solvents, stabilized by π-π stacking interactions. [18] On the other hand, non-aromatic polymers have been used for non-covalent functionalization of CNTs via CH-π and OH-π interactions. [19] Though effective interactions are expected when highly conjugated polymers are used to functionalize BNNTs, various systems that are widely available and inexpensive are continuously being explored, including surfactants and non-aromatic polymers. [11] Here, we report for the first time the versatility of a nonaromatic polymer ethyl cellulose (EC) to functionalize and disperse BNNTs. EC is non-toxic and soluble in various organic solvents. It is also cost-effective and readily available compared to the established highly-conjugated PmPV for dispersing BNNTs. [20,21] Furthermore, it is highly flexi-ble with alkyl and hydroxyl groups in its backbone, which makes it a promising candidate material to functionalize BNNT surface via non-covalent bonding. [22] Our approach highlights the simultaneous isolation and dispersion of BNNTs from a mass-produced source containing impurities, such as hBN and fullerene-like BN. The simplicity of the process, that is, mixing by sonication followed by centrifugation, to form a stable colloidal dispersion of BNNTs, could be applied in the production of high-quality materials for large-scale applications.

# RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

## Morphology of BNNT before and after purification

Scheme 1 summarizes the flow of the purification process by isolating the polymer-wrapped BNNT from the bundled source, dispersed in organic solvents. The dispersion medium consists of the polymer dissolved in organic solvent (PolSol) system. The mass-produced BNNT source was imaged using scanning electron microscope (SEM) before the purification process. The SEM micrograph of as-received (ar-) materials with a reported composition of 50% BNNT, 20% hBN, and 30% other impurities, including BN cages and volatile components, is shown below (Figure 1A). After the optimal cleaning process, the purified BNNTs (p-BNNTs) were imaged using SEM and transmission electron microscope (TEM) as shown (Figure 1B,C,D). Minimal amount of impurities remained (Figure 1B), suggested to be traces of BN cages and nanoparticles. These impurities are attached to BNNTs making it more difficult to be removed without damaging the nanotubes. BNNT was individually wrapped by EC (Figure 1C,D) which forms a very stable dispersion of purified BNNT in the Pol-Sol system. 

## Functionalization of BNNTs with EC in organic solvents

The ar-BNNT source formed a transparent, yellowish, colloidal dispersion with EC in the polymer-solvent (PolSol) systems after mixing and centrifugation. EC is a non-aromatic polymer bearing alkyl and hydroxyl groups in its backbone suggesting that wrapping is due to the CH-π and OH-π interactions between EC and BNNT (Figure 2). These non-covalent bonds can be stabilized by a solvent that can form additional interactions to the tube and polymer. We choose common organic solvents that can all dissolve EC but differs in polarity, hydrophobicity, and aromaticity.

The degree of dispersibility of BNNT was highest in the EC-benzyl alcohol (BnOH) system based on the UV-Vis absorption spectra of the dispersion obtained from 300 to 600 nm (Figure 3A), where absorbance is expected proportional to solute concentration on the basis of the Lambert-Beer's law. BnOH possesses polarity and aromaticity, capable of forming H-bonding and hydrophobic interac-tions with EC. BnOH can also adsorb in the unwrapped or exposed surface of BNNT held by π-π interactions when the aromatic ring is oriented towards the tube. In addition, the polarizability of the B-N bonds in BNNT can offer additional N-H interactions, adding stability to the dispersion system. Dissolved EC (with various solvents) can disperse BNNT as it can wrap the surface of BNNT via non-covalent modifications; however, to increase the yield of the BNNT in the dispersion or increase the dispersibility of BNNT, it is also important to choose the best solvent, in this case, BnOH which were characterized using spectroscopy.

The optimum amount of EC needed to disperse the maximum amount of BNNT in a fixed volume of BnOH was also determined from the UV-Vis absorption spectra of BNNT dispersions at varying PolSol concentrations, measured from 300 to 600 nm (Figure 3B), with inset absorbance values versus different EC concentrations, of the dispersion at 300 nm. At 0.125% mg EC per mL of a solvent used, the maximum absorbance was observed indicating the maximum amount of the EC-wrapped BNNT in the PolSol system. 0.003% 0.010% 0.025% 0.125% 0.250%

# (B)

F I G U R E 3 UV-Vis absorption spectra of (A) BNNTs dispersed in EC dissolved using common organic solvents and (B) BNNT dispersion at increasing concentration of EC using BnOH as solvent, with inset absorbance values versus different EC concentrations, of the dispersion at 300 nm The applied centrifugation rate on the BNNT dispersion after mixing was varied using the optimum concentration of PolSol system. Before centrifugation, the ar-BNNT source contains bundles and aggregates of BNNT, hBN, and BN cages, as shown in the SEM image (Figure 4A). Upon increasing the centrifugation rate from 10,000 to 30,000 relative centrifugal force (RCF), the amount of impurities is reduced significantly (Figure 4B,C,D). Very minimal impurities of less than 40 nm diameter are noticeable after applying 30,000 RCF where the size distribution of the traces of impurities becomes narrow (Figure S1). These impurities were further reduced when the centrifugation time was increased from 60 to 180 minutes (Fig- ure S2). The effect of varying sonication time examined at 10, 20, 60, and 90 minutes (Figure S3) showed that debundling with minimal destruction was achieved using the shortest time; therefore all the dispersions were sonicated for 10 minutes to avoid possible damage on the tubes during mixing.

The FT-IR spectra of the as-received (ar-) and purified (p-) BNNT are shown below (Figure 5A,F). After the purification, p-BNNT shows distinct peaks centered at 1366 and 811 cm -1 , corresponding to the in-plane B-N optical mode (TO) and the B-N-B out-of-plane buckling modes (R) of BNNT, respectively. [14,23] This shows almost similar peak positions to ar-BNNT but with evident differences F I G U R E 4 SEM images of BNNTs (A) before purification and after centrifugation at (B) 10,000, (C) 20,000, and (D) 30,000 applied relative centrifugal force to the BNNTs wrapped with EC in benzyl alcohol in the general shapes, height, and width of the peaks. A broader peak from 1600 to 1200 cm -1 is observed for the ar-BNNTs, explained due to the overlap of the tangential and longitudinal frequency modes of B-N bonds from BNNT and the impurities present, mainly hBN. [24] The narrowing and increase in the symmetry of the peak of p-BNNT suggest an increase in the purity of BNNT after isolating the EC-wrapped BNNT from the source. The observed shift in the absorption of ar-BNNT from 803 to 811 cm -1 of p-BNNT also supports this increase in purity of BNNT, similar to the recent studies of Harrison et al. on FT-IR spectroscopy technique for the quantification of hBN impurities in BNNTs. [25] They showed that the height ratio of the peaks at 780 and 1327 cm -1 , corresponding to the R and TO modes, respectively, shows direct proportionality to the amount of hBN.

BNNTs were isolated (p-BNNT) from unpurified source (ar-BNNT) without any other pre-heat treatment as reported earlier where boron impurities are converted first to its water-soluble oxide form (ox-BNNT) for easier removal by water or ethanol washing, leaving only the mix- ture of hBN and BNNT (ow-BNNT). [26] Therefore, we only considered the R/TO ratios of the ow-BNNT and p-BNNT reliable (Table 1), as there are no overlapping FT-IR absorptions in their R and TO peaks, aside from the absorptions from BNNT and hBN. A decrease in the R/TO ratio of the isolated BNNT, down to 0.32, implies a significant removal of hBN, hence enhancement in the purity of BNNT, which is also confirmed from our high-resolution electron microscope images. The amount of the BNNT dispersed in the Pol-Sol system was also quantified using mass conversion 800 1300 1800 Wavenumber [cm - 

FT-IR spectra of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) and as-received (ar-), oxidized (ox-), oxidized-washed (ow-) and purified BNNTs (p-) measurements based on the paper by Smith McWilliams et al. [11] The residue after the centrifugation process was carefully separated from the colloidal dispersion, dried, weighed, and characterized using thermogravimetric (TG) analysis to calculate the amount of BNNT retained in the PolSol system (Figure 6). Using EC-BnOH, approximately 55% by mass of BNNT was retained in the colloidal dispersion using our optimum conditions (10 minutes sonication time and 30,000 RCF for 180 minutes). This is higher compared to the dispersion we prepared using a highly conjugated polymer, poly(m-phenylene-co-2,5-dioctoxy-pphenylenevinylene) (PmPV), [18] with a 42% dispersion yield, using chloroform (CHCl 3 ) as a solvent. This is supported, qualitatively with the SEM images (Figure S4) of the colloidal dispersion showing more BNNT in the EC-BnOH than the PmPV-CHCl 3 system. The TEM image of the aqueous dispersion of BNNT with carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) shows more impurities (Figure S5). In an aqueous system, CMC tends to form micelles that can enclose other impurities such as BN cages and sheets. Hence, the isolation of BNNTs in the aqueous system was not attained using the same approach due to the less selectivity of CMC with BNNTs containing impurities.

Lastly, the colloidal dispersions obtained using ow-BNNTs at the same optimal cleaning conditions show more amount of BN impurities (Figure S6a). The applied heat treatment has bound the BN cages and BN nanotubes stronger making them more difficult to be isolated. When we tried to increase the sonication time, more BNNTs with fewer impurities were obtained (Figure S6d), however, it is known that longer sonication time would introduce more damage to the nanotubes. All the SEM samples were prepared using equal volume (30 μL) of the colloidal dispersions, casted and dried in a cleaned Si wafer (20×20 mm 2 ) for a more reliable comparison.

# CONCLUSION

In summary, our work has highlighted the enhancement in the purity of BNNT, simultaneously de-bundled and dispersed in a non-aromatic polymer-organic solvent system. The stable colloidal dispersion contained highly pure individualized BNNT with very minimal trace of nanosized hBN impurities, qualitatively and quantitatively supported by comprehensive characterizations including FESEM and TEM images, UV-Vis, and FT-IR spectra, and TG analyses. Our method using the polymer EC has provided us a deeper insight to the versatility of using non-toxic, widely available, and inexpensive non-aromatic polymeric systems, further amplified by a chosen solvent, to enhance the dispersibility and stability of sorted BNNTs in the system. In particular, using a simplified and less destructive approach without heat treatment, we have isolated and dispersed individual nanotubes in our designed system. This can provide a wider range of applications specifically for the production of composite materials that require a large amount of high-quality BNNTs. 

# EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

## Isolation of BNNTs via EC-assisted dispersion and centrifugation in organic solvents

BNNTs (BNNT-R No. 34235, Tekna Advanced Materials Inc.) were mass-produced based on induction plasmatorch methods with a reported BNNT percentage by weight of approximately 50%. EC polymer (45-55 mPa-s, Tokyo Chemical Industry Co.) was dissolved in various solvents such as acetone, benzyl alcohol, butanol, ethanol, methanol, propanol, tetrahydrofuran, and toluene (Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) to prepare the PolSol system. About 5 mg of the original material was mixed with 20 mL of PolSol system in a vial. The system was dispersed using QSonica ultrasonic dispersion machine and was centrifuged using Kubota 7000 to separate the colloidal dispersion and residue for characterization. The sonication time was varied at 10, 20, 60, and 90 minutes. The centrifugation rate and time were also varied at 10,000, 20,000, and 30,000 RCF; and 60, 120, and 180minutes, respectively. The PolSol concentrations were varied from 0.050, 0.025, 0.125, 0.250, and 0.500% mg EC per mL of solvent used, respectively. For comparison, ow-BNNTs were used in preparing the dispersion using the PolSol system. The percent (%) BNNT in the colloidal dispersion was also analyzed by mass analysis.

## Characterization

Ultra high-resolution field emission scanning electron microscopy (UHR FESEM) was carried out using Hitachi SU9000 equipped with a secondary electron detector. The equipment features superior low-kV performance utilizing in-lens SEM optics and improved vacuum technology. The samples were run using an acceleration voltage ranging from 1 to 5 kV. The samples were prepared by drop-casting the BNNT dispersion in a cleaned silicon (Si) wafer, which was either dried or calcined prior to imaging. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was carried out using JEOL JEM-3100FEF and Hitachi H-9000NAR operating at 300 kV. The samples were prepared by drop-casting the BNNT dispersion on a high-resolution copper grid coated with a thin layer of carbon for adhesion (HRC-C10 STEM Cu100P). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) measurements were performed using a JASCO 4200 spectrophotometer equipped with a reflection ATR accessory for the powder samples. The optical absorption spectra of the colloidal dispersion were measured using a SHIMADZU UV-3600Plus spectrophotometer. Thermogravimetric (TG) analysis was conducted on the remaining residue after dispersion and centrifugation, using Shimadzu TGA-60. The temperature was ramped up from 30 • C to 1100 • C at 10 • C min -1 with a continuous supply of dry air across the sample at 100 mL hr -1 . The thermogram profile was used for the percent (%) BNNT dispersion yield calculation via mass analysis.

# S U P P O R T I N G I N F O R M AT I O N

Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article.

