# I. INTRODUCTION

Carbon is the most abundant naturally occurring element exhibiting an amazing variety of molecular and structural formulations which find numerous applications in material technology. The principle crystalline forms of pure carbon are Diamond and Graphite. Carbon also exists in amorphous forms like a-C, a-C:H and tetrahedral amorphous carbon (ta:C). 'Carbon nanomaterials' is a widely explored research area in recent times owing to the diverse new applications of these novel materials attributable to their interesting mechanical, electrical, catalytic and optical properties. A variety of intriguing nanostructures of carbon such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs), nanocrystalline graphite, graphene, fullerenes, nano-spheres, nano-onions, and nano-diamonds have been synthesized by established techniques of carbon synthesis such as carbonization of organic/polymeric precursors, 1, 2 chemical/autoclave synthesis from small halogenated aromatic molecules, [3][4][5][6][7][8][9] chemical vapor deposition, [10][11][12] excimer laser ablation of graphitic targets, 13,14 sputtering/plasma methods, 15 arc discharge methods 16 etc. Sphere-like nanoparticles of carbon or carbon nano-spheres (CNSs) have also been synthesized by several methods ranging from catalytic CVD, [17][18][19] hydrothermal methods 20 and template based chemical synthesis. 21 However, to the best of our knowledge, an efficient, low temperature and high purity (without by-products) synthesis process is yet to be established in the context of CNS preparation. 17  at low temperature and mild conditions is indeed a real challenge. A pulsed laser represents an interesting source of controlled optical energy transfer to any chemical system at room temperature and hence can be envisaged to offer new solutions in this context. Herein, we report a novel method of nano-carbon synthesis by laser photochemistry; a process that involves pulsed UV laser irradiation of liquid halobenzenes, (chlorobenzene (CB) and o-dichlorobenzene (DCB)) resulting in the photo-cleavage of the carbon-halogen bond, generating a large number of free radicals and their stitching into nanospheres of carbon. We term this as the "Pulsed Laser-induced Photochemical Stitching (PLPS)" technique. In terms of the basic nature of the primary process, this is to be clearly distinguished from laser induced direct photochemical breaking of C-C bonds of the aromatic rings or laser induced indirect thermal breaking of the C-C bonds, which can also lead to different forms of carbon. We show clear evidence that in our case primarily we get layered (onion-like) intermediates formed by the stitching process which can lead to other forms through secondary absorption.

# II. EXPERIMENTAL

## A. Materials & Equipment

High purity (GR grade) routine organic solvents Chlorobenzene (CB) and o-Dichlorobenzene (DCB) were obtained from Merck Chemicals and were used as received. A 248 nm KrF excimer laser (Lambda Physic -Germany) with a maximum average power of 40 watts (pulse energy = 150 mJ) and a pulse-width of 20 ns was used in the irradiation process.

## B. The Process

50 ml of transparent liquid DCB was irradiated by laser pulse train (10 Hz) for 10 minutes in a quartz beaker under constant stirring (Fig. 1,schematic). The solution gradually turned black due to the formation of optically absorbing solid state material (Fig. 2, photo). The black solution formed was then filtered through 0.2 μm (pore size) Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) membrane. A black carbonaceous solid was obtained, which was thoroughly characterized. Similarly, 50 ml of liquid CB was irradiated for 30 minutes. Interestingly, CB was noted to take a longer time for the product formation, presumably due to the availability of a single reaction site (C-Cl bond) in comparison with the two sites on DCB, as discussed later in the context of the mechanism.

To further study the influence of the laser energy flux and the time of irradiation we also carried out experiments involving laser irradiation of o-DCB at varying energies (80mJ, 200 mJ) and for different time intervals (5, 10, 20 mins). 22 

# III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The solid material obtained in each case was characterized for its composition, nature, thermal stability, surface area and conductivity. 22   The solid black compound was predominantly a carbon containing material as determined by the composition analysis by Energy Dispersive Analysis of X-rays (EDAX) and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS). 22 These carbonaceous materials obtained from both CB and DCB were also characterized by x-ray diffraction (XRD). In each case, one main very broad peak attributable to the (002) plane of graphite at 2θ = 24.45 • was observed along with a small hump at 2θ = 43.47 • corresponding to (100) plane (Fig. 3(A)) (JCPDS-ICDD Card No.41-1487). The XRD data reveals the disordered graphitic nature of the material. The greater the deviation from the ideal graphitic (002) peak position at 26.6 • the greater is the disordered nature of the system. The broad peaks indicate that there is no long range order and point to the presence of graphitic nanoparticles in the system.

In both the cases Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 3(B)) exhibits the usual 'G Band' at 1590 cm -1 attributed to the E 2g symmetry mode of the sp 2 carbon in carbon compounds. A 'D Band' also exists at 1345 cm -1 . The D band arises due to hexagonal ring systems in the compound and is a forbidden transition. It becomes an allowed transition due to defects in the system. In crystalline compounds like pure graphite, there are very few defects and hence the D band is absent. However with decreasing particle size and increasing defect concentration, the intensity of the D band increases. An intense D band also indicates a larger presence of hexagonal ring systems. In pure amorphous carbon an intense D band does not exist. A shoulder to the G band appears in such systems. It is also clear that decreasing particle size and increasing defects contribute to a greater I D /I G ratio. Since the carbon compounds obtained in our case show a high I D /I G ratio (1 in the case of CB and 0.95 in the case of DCB) presence of nanoparticles is clearly suggested, which is evidenced later by other techniques. 17,23 HRTEM images (Figs. 4(A)-4(F)) clearly demonstrate the presence of CNSs obtained from both the starting materials. CNSs are known to possess a strong tendency for agglomeration. 17,24 This happens because most of the CNSs are not completely closed spheres. They possess open edges and the outer graphitic layer encloses more such spherical particles. CNSs with sizes ranging from 30-40 nm to about 200 nm have been observed in this process. Presence of a large number of hollow CNSs was also detected (Figs. 4(A) and 4(F)). In the laser synthesis of CNSs in our case, the nanospheres assemble into micron sized porous flakes which is quite evident from the SEM images (Figs. 5(A)-5(D)).

TGA studies on the CNSs obtained from CB and DCB were used to determine their thermal stability in air. It was observed that the CNSs are air stable up to a temperature of 400-450 • C above which the decomposition process sets in. 22 The BET surface area measurement yielded the surface area for CNSs synthesized from CB and DCB to be 38 m 2 /g and 108 m 2 /g respectively. The exact reason behind the difference in the surface area of carbon acquired from these nominally similar precursors remains unclear, although the extra chlorine in DCB may have a role to play in the much larger surface area obtained in that case.

We made frequency dependent conductivity measurements on pellets made from the carbon synthesized by using CB and DCB to explore whether the carbon formed is electrically functional and therefore potentially useful for several applications. We expected it to have good conductivity in view of the fact that due to the suggested ring-stitching nature discussed in more details below, the synthesized carbon is configured as an assembly of graphene like sheets. The results of conductivity measurements shown in Fig. 6 

## IV. MECHANISM

Pulsed laser photochemical synthesis of carbon nanomaterials appears to be a relatively unexplored area as compared to many other techniques used to form carbon. Carbon formation by laser pyrolysis of organic compounds by laser heating of an immersed graphitic target is a more explored technique with respect to laser processing of liquid materials. 25,26 Separately, a mixture of graphitic and polymeric carbon is shown to result along with gaseous and low volatile hydrocarbons by photolysis of liquid Benzene and Toluene at high photon energy (193 nm from ArF laser). 27 The wavelength at 193 nm provides intense energy amounting to an approximate value of 620 kJ/mol in a molecular system. This clearly exceeds the bond dissociation energies of C=C (611-632 kJ/mol), phenyl C-H (473 kJ/mol) and C-C bond energies of all systems and a breakdown of the aromatic ring also entails. Hence a complete photolytic cleavage of all types of bonds will occur in an ArF laser system as previously described. A 248 nm KrF laser system does not provide such high energy, but enough energy (∼482.3 kJ/mole) to dissociate the readily photolabile carbon-halogen bond. The energy required to dissociate the C-Cl bond is ∼311 kJ/mole. The C=C bonds of the benzene ring require a bond dissociation energy of ∼566.5 kJ/mole. Hence the 248 nm laser pulses cannot breakdown the aromatic ring. There have been some previous theoretical investigations of dissociation of halobenzenes in UV laser. [28][29][30] DCB dissociation mechanism into phenyl and halogen radicals at 266 nm has been studied by time of flight measurements. 31 It has also been discussed that in the absence of water, CB dissociates to form a polyaromatic hydrocarbon like structure (smaller graphite-like networks) in solid ice cavities in the presence of a non-laser UV source. 32 Also, gaseous CB has been reported to dissociate to form phenyl radicals at 248 nm by KrF excimer laser source. 33 Consequently, we can conclude that an intense laser irradiation of liquid DCB and CB at 248 nm can generate a large number of phenyl radicals because of the photo-cleavage of numerous reactive sites (C-Cl bonds). These radicals would then react with each other to form a graphitic network in the solution consisting of hexagonal rings. Increased surface energy of such graphitic networks in solution can cause them to curl around a pentagonal or heptagonal defect into the observed CNSs. 34 This process of sphere formation will involve the initial formation of smaller spheres with sizes ranging from 2-10 nm. Such multilayered fullerene-like molecules are known as carbon nano-onions. Carbon nano-onions have a high degree of crystallinity as they are highly ordered in structure. Interestingly, the filtrate obtained after filtration of these irradiated liquids identified the presence of these carbon nano-onions corroborating our hypothesis (Pl. see Fig. 7 and the inset which shows the Electron diffraction pattern). The larger spheres must grow around these carbon nano-onions. With increasing size the degree of disorder in the graphitic structure increases. We thus visualize this as a laser induced stitching process of aromatic free radicals into carbon nanoparticles (Scheme 1). The detailed mechanism (Scheme 2) of the processes that can lead to the stitching of free radicals was confirmed by pH paper test of the solution. The pH paper turned pink confirming an acidic environment. Hence we can confirm that HCl was formed in the process as described in the detailed mechanism.

The stitching process was further verified using time dependent UV-Visible spectroscopy. 25 ml of o-dichlorobenzene (DCB) was irradiated by pulsed excimer laser for different time durations such as 1 min, 4 mins, 10 mins and 30 mins separately in a quartz beaker. The black solutions obtained in each case were filtered through 0.2 μm PTFE membrane under vacuum. The filtrates obtained therein were studied by UV-visible spectroscopy (Fig. 8).

Fig. 8(A) clearly shows an increased absorption in the visible region with increased time of irradiation. Fig. 8(B) brings out the red shift with increased time of irradiation. Thus, with increasing size of the graphitic/aromatic network a definite red shift and greater absorption in the visible region is observed. This occurs due to a gradual decrease in the HOMO-LUMO gap that accompanies the product formation by this process.

In order to further establish that the nano-carbon formation by stitching process is exclusive to the C-Cl bond and not due to the breakdown of the aromatic ring in the haloaromatic compounds used, a control experiment was performed with benzene (Fig. 9). No optically absorbing (black) compound formation was observed in the irradiation of benzene at 248 nm even after 1 h. This clearly proves that the carbon formed with haloaromatics does not involve the breakage of the carbon bonds in the aromatic ring.

The filtrate obtained during the separation process is found to contain nano-onions and stitched graphite like networks which have relatively smaller dimensions. A very interesting phenomenon is observed in the filtrate obtained from DCB. The filtrate shows a strong blue luminescence (Fig. 10) which is absent in pure DCB. Since Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) and Graphene Quantum Dots (GQDs) are known to exhibit blue luminescence, this evidence further establishes our case. 35,36 To establish the generic nature of PLPS process we studied the case of bycyclic 1-chloro naphthalene. Interestingly, when 1-chloro naphthalene was similarly irradiated with UV laser pulses functional carbon was obtained [Raman Spectra and I-V curve shown in Fig. 11], verifying our claim of PLPS as a broad approach involving haloaromatics.

Finally, to establish even broader applicability of the method, we attempted in-situ synthesis of carbon based inorganic nanocomposite TiO 2 -Carbon by the PLPS process. In this experiment TiO 2 (Degussa P25) powder was added to DCB and sonicated. The mixture was then irradiated by 248 nm UV laser pulses with constant stirring. The compound obtained was filtered and then washed by centrifugation by water and acetone (3 times). We obtained clear evidence of nanocomposite formation of carbon and TiO 2 (Please see the Raman Spectra and TEM images in Figure 12). Such metal oxide-conducting carbon composite systems have tremendous potential for energy storage applications (ultra-capacitors and Li-ion battery). These cases however are under further investigation.  

## V. CONCLUSION

A novel PLPS process is introduced to engineer solid carbon nanoparticles from liquid halobenzenes by laser photochemistry at room temperature and laboratory environment. Electrically conducting high surface area carbon nano-spheres (CNSs) have thus been directly synthesized from routine laboratory solvents (which if discarded would be simply a toxic waste). Furthermore, in principle, a complete conversion of liquid materials (CB & DCB) to solid carbon can be achieved by a cyclic process of solvent irradiation and distillation to recycle the solvent followed by further irradiation, which we have confirmed. PLPS can thus prove to be a highly efficient route of nano-carbon synthesis.

It can also be foreseen that the demonstrated technique would be a generic pathway for generating a variety of carbon nanomaterials from halogen containing reactants at variable irradiation conditions as well as carbon-based nanocomposites by in-situ synthesis involving concurrent presence of other precursors, organic molecules, polymers or nanoparticles in the solvent. Laser photochemical synthesis does not require high temperature that is usually associated with the synthesis of carbonbased materials facilitating the synthesis of carbon nanocomposites with polymers and other organic compounds. Moreover, being a laser process it is applicable for direct-write schemes of localized synthesis.

It is clear that the outcome of any such laser synthesis experiment will certainly depend on the frequency of the laser through its connection with the ability of the photon energy to break specific bonds and also the pulsed (with specific pulse width) or CW character of the laser. The higher frequency laser photons will break a more diverse set of bonds and lead to more complex or possibly more amorphous and defected configurations. Lower frequency lasers, especially those in the near-infrared and infrared regions will cause thermal dissociation with different consequences for the final properties.

