# EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Animals-Mice were handled according to Swiss Federal Veterinary Office guidelines, under the authorization of the Office Ve ´te ´rinaire Cantonal du Danton de Vaud (authorization 1370.3 to P. S.). White-bellied agouti B6CBAa A wϪJ /A-Eda Ta /J Tabby mice (000314; The Jackson Laboratory) were bred as Eda Ta /Eda Ta and Eda Ta /Y mutants or as ϩ/ϩ and ϩ/Y wild type controls. EDAR-deficient OVE1B mice were as described previously (5). EDA-deficient dogs (19) were cared for in accordance with the principles outlined in the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and in the International Guiding Principles for Biomedical Research Involving Animals.

Plasmids and Recombinant Proteins-Plasmids used in this study were either previously published or derived from the published plasmids by standard molecular biology techniques (supplemental Fig. S1) (13,20,21). A fully human form of Fc-EDA1 was kindly provided by Dr. Neil Kirby (EdimerPharma, Boston). hEDAR-Fc and mEDAR-Fc were produced and purified as described previously (21).

Generation and Purification of Anti-EDAR Monoclonal Antibodies-150 g of hEDAR-Fc or mEDAR-Fc (amino acid residues 29 -183 supplemental Fig. S1) were briefly sonicated three times in 750 l of PBS/STIMUNE (1:1, v/v) (Cedi-diagnostics, Lelystad, The Netherlands). Female OVE1B mice were immunized subcutaneously (base of tail, 200 l) with the antigen preparation and boosted between days 10 and 14 with antigen in PBS/STIMUNE (base of tail, 150 l). Mice positive for anti-EDAR antibodies at day 30 were boosted with 150 g of antigen in PBS at day 40 (base of tail). Three days later, lymph node cells were fused with myeloma cells according to standard procedures, grown in complete RPMI 1640 medium over a feeder layer of mouse macrophages, and selected 24 h later with hypoxanthine/aminopterin/thymidine-containing medium. Supernatants of 96-well plates were tested by ELISA for antibody secretion. Positive clones were subcloned twice by limiting dilution and then slowly adapted to medium without macrophages and hypoxanthine/aminopterin/thymidine medium supplement. Most hybridomas could then be progressively adapted to serumfree Opti-MEM medium (Invitrogen). Antibodies were purified from conditioned Opti-MEM supernatants by affinity chromatography on protein G-Sepharose (GE Healthcare).

Transfections-HEK 293T cells were grown in DMEM, 10% fetal calf serum and transfected by the calcium phosphate method. Cells were grown for 7 days in serum-free Opti-MEM medium (Invitrogen) for the production of EDAR-Fc truncation mutant fusion proteins or for 48 h in complete medium for surface expression of receptors-TRAILR3 fusion proteins.

ELISA-For the detection of anti-EDAR antibodies, ELISA plates were coated with hEDAR-Fc at 1 g/ml, blocked, and revealed with anti-EDAR antibodies (adequately diluted serum of EDAR immunized mice, hybridoma supernatants, or purified antibody) followed by a peroxidase-coupled goat antimouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch). For isotype determination, ELISA plates were coated with 1 g/ml of anti-EDAR antibodies and revealed with peroxidase-coupled antibodies against the heavy chain of mouse IgG1, IgG2a, or IgG2b (Southern Biotech). For epitope mapping, ELISA plates were coated with an F(abЈ) 2 fragment of a goat anti-human Ig (Jackson ImmunoResearch) to capture various EDAR-Fc constructs or a control receptor (B cell maturation antigen-Fc) in cell supernatants. EDAR-Fc constructs and B cell maturation antigen-Fc were revealed either with peroxidase-coupled donkey anti-human (HϩL) (Jackson ImmunoResearch) or with anti-EDAR antibodies at 1 g/ml followed by peroxidase-coupled goat anti-mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch) or with FLAG-EDA1 or FLAG-BAFF followed by biotinylated anti-FLAG M2 antibody (Sigma) and peroxidase-coupled streptavidin.

SDS-PAGE, Western Blot, and Native Gel Electrophoresis-Anti-EDAR antibodies (10 g/lane) were analyzed by SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions followed by Coomassie Blue staining. Antibodies were also analyzed by native gel electrophoresis (4 g/lane) (Biomidi, Toulouse, France) and stained with Amido Black according to manufacturer's instructions, except that the electrophoresis was performed for 1 h.

To test the ability of anti-EDAR antibodies to recognize denatured EDAR, 2 g of bovine serum albumin, 20 ng of hEDAR-Fc, and 20 ng of hFas-Fc were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blot under reducing (100 mM dithiothreitol) or nonreducing conditions, revealed with the various anti-EDAR antibodies at 1 g/ml followed by peroxidasecoupled anti-mouse antibody (1:10,000) and ECL reagent (GE Healthcare).

Sequencing of Anti-EDAR Antibodies-RNA was extracted from hybridoma cells with an RNeasy kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's guidelines. cDNA was prepared by reverse transcription with Ready-To-Go T-Primed first-Strand kit (GE Healthcare). Variable sequences of the heavy and light chains were amplified by PCR as described previously (22). PCR products were sequenced on both strands. Sequences were analyzed for gene usage using the IMGT sequence alignment software.

FACS Analyses-293T cells co-transfected with enhanced GFP, and receptor-glycosylphosphatidylinositol expression plasmids were stained with Fc-EDA1 or Fc-EDA2 essentially as described before (20) or with anti-EDAR antibodies at 4 g/ml followed by phycoerythrin-coupled anti-mouse secondary antibody. Following staining, cells were analyzed using a FACScan flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and FlowJo software (TreeStar, Ashland, OR).

Fab Generation and Affinity Determination by Surface Plasmon Resonance-An IgG1 Fab and F(abЈ) 2 preparation kit was used according to the manufacturer's instructions (Pierce). Briefly, purified anti-EDAR antibodies were digested for 72 h at 37 °C with immobilized ficin. Fc fragments and undigested antibodies were removed by chromatography on protein A. The flow-through, containing the Fab and F(abЈ) 2 fragments, was concentrated and applied onto a Superdex-200 gel permeation chromatography column eluted in PBS. Absorbance was recorded at 280 nm.

For surface plasmon resonance, human EDAR-Fc was captured on anti-human IgG Fc-derivatized CM5 chips in a Biacore T100 apparatus (GE Healthcare). Fab solutions of anti-EDAR antibodies at the indicated concentration in PBS were applied for 90 s at 50 l/min and subsequently washed with buffer. All curve fittings were performed assuming a 1:1 binding model, although two antibodies had a biphasic dissociation that did not fit the 1:1 model.

In Vitro Cytotoxicity Assays-Fas-deficient hEDAR:Fas Jurkat cells have been described before, and mEDAR:Fas-expressing cells were obtained by retroviral infection according to the same protocol (13). The cytotoxicity assay using EDAR:Fas Jurkat cells was performed as described for FasL on Jurkat cells (23).

Injections in EDA-deficient Animals-Tabby pups were labeled by puncture of a footpad with a 30-gauge needle dipped in china ink. Intraperitoneal injections with anti-EDAR antibodies or Fc-EDA1 were performed within 24 h after birth with a maximal volume of 15 l, using 0.5-ml U-100 insulin syringes (BD Biosciences). Examination and photography of tail hairs were performed at days 20 -22 post-injection. Pregnant Tabby mice were treated intravenously at days 13 and 20 (E13/E20) or 9 and 17 (E9/E17) of gestation with 400 g of anti-EDAR antibody (antibody 3). Offspring were analyzed at 6 months of age, essentially as described previously (18). Age-matched wild type and EDA-deficient Tabby mice were similarly analyzed for comparison. Tracheal glands were detected by Alcian blue staining (24). Three dogs affected with X-linked ectodermal 

## TABLE 1 Characteristics of anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies

IGHV and IGLV indicate immunoglobulin heavy and light chain variable region genes likely used in the antibody. hu is human EDAR-Fc; mu is mouse EDAR-Fc. I ϩ II indicates EDAR-Fc containing CRD1 and CRD2 of human EDAR. I is EDAR-Fc containing CRD1 only. Full is EDAR-Fc containing the full extracellular domain of EDAR. k a is the association constant. k d is the dissociation constant. K D is the affinity of monomeric Fab to EDAR-Fc. EC 50 tail hair indicates the dose of antibody required to get half-maximal tail hair reversion score when administered intraperitoneally in newborn Tabby mice. EC 50 , mEDAR:Fas or hEDAR:Fas means dose of antibody required to kill half of the EDAR:Fas-expressing Jurkat cells. dysplasia were administered agonist anti-EDAR antibody 3 in the jugular vein at 2 days of life (n ϭ 2; 10 mg/kg) or at 14 days of life (n ϭ 1; 7 mg/kg). The analysis was performed essentially as described previously (17,25). In particular, the dogs were monitored daily for adverse reactions, overall health, and specific ocular and respiratory diseases. Complete blood cell counts and serum biochemistry screens were evaluated within 2-7 days after injection with agonist anti-EDAR antibody. Dental radiographs were obtained when the dogs were adults, when about 1 year old. Shirmer tear testing was performed at 6-month intervals. Complete necropsies were performed between 1.6 and 2.4 years of age. Tissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, routinely processed, sectioned at 5 m, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin.

# RESULTS

## Generation and Screening of Agonist Anti-EDAR Antibodies-

To obtain cross-reacting antibodies against conserved EDAR regions, EDAR-deficient mice were immunized with either human or mouse EDAR-Fc fusion proteins. The EDAR-deficient mouse strains Downless and Sleek have loss-of-function mutations in the extracellular or intracellular domains of EDAR, respectively, but still express the protein. We therefore immunized OVE1B mice in which the Edar gene is completely deleted by random genomic integration of an unrelated transgene (5,26). Hybridoma supernatants with anti-EDAR reactivity were screened for agonist activity using two complementary tests. In the first one, surrogate reporter cell lines stably expressing hEDAR:Fas or mEDAR:Fas fusion proteins were used. EDAR activation in these reporter cells leads to apoptotic cell death by activation of the Fas pathway (13). In the second assay, hybridoma supernatants were administered intraperitoneally to newborn, EDA-deficient Tabby pups (18). Tabby mice completely lack tail hairs, and the agonist activity of antibodies can therefore be measured by the induction of tail hair, provided that antibodies recognize and activate mouse EDAR. Several hybridoma secreted agonist antibodies with in vivo activity, but only a few were also active in the cell-based in vitro assay (data not shown). Selected hybridoma were subcloned and adapted for growth in serum-free medium from which antibodies were purified (Fig. 1A). The monoclonal nature of these antibodies was further confirmed by their sharp migration in native protein electrophoresis (Fig. 1B).

Agonist Anti-EDAR Antibodies Have Varied but Relatively Limited Sequence Characteristics-Variable regions of heavy and light antibody chains were amplified by RT-PCR and sequenced for several hybridoma. A number of different variable region genes were identified for both the heavy and light chains (Table 1), but some of them were shared by two or three hybridoma, usually with different somatic mutations. Interestingly, antibodies with identical heavy and light variable genes sharing greater than 90% sequence identity were obtained from different mice immunized with mouse (antibody 8) or human EDAR (antibodies 1 and 3) (Table 1 and supplemental Fig. S2). Thus, different variable genes can be used to generate agonist anti-EDAR antibodies, but the gene repertoire must be limited as similar antibodies were found two or three times in the relatively limited panel that we have analyzed.

Agonist Antibodies Recognize at Least Three Different Epitopes in EDAR-EDAR contains three cysteine-rich domains in its extracellular region, plus a stalk sequence (Fig. 2A). We used EDAR constructs containing these four regions alone or in combinations to roughly characterize the epitopes recognized by the antibodies. Some antibodies recognized CRD1 alone, others recognized CRD1 and -2 together, and one reacted with CRD1-3, but none bound to receptors lacking CRD1 (Fig. 2B and Table 1). All antibodies recognized recombinant EDAR by Western blot under nonreducing conditions, but only three reacted with reduced EDAR (Fig. 2C). These three antibodies had their epitopes localized in CRD1. It is possible that the presence of CRD1 is required for correct folding of EDAR. Abnormal disulfide bridge formation in the absence of CRD1 would explain why antibodies did not recognize constructs containing CRD2 and CRD3. Taken together, these results indicate that agonist anti-EDAR antibodies can recognize at least three different EDAR epitopes located in CRD1 and probably CRD2 and CRD3.

Agonist Anti-EDAR Antibodies Cross-react with EDAR of Various Mammals and Birds-Most anti-EDAR antibodies cross-reacted with human, dog, rat, mouse, and chicken EDAR when these were expressed as glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored molecules in 293T cells (Fig. 3). Antibody 5 only reacted minimally with chicken EDAR, whereas antibody 15 that had been selected on the basis of its specificity for human EDAR rather than for its agonist activity recognized human and dog EDAR, but not rat, mouse and chicken EDAR (Fig. 3).

Binding Characteristics of Anti-EDAR Antibodies to EDAR-The affinity of 11 agonist antibodies to human EDAR was determined by surface plasmon resonance. For this purpose, monomeric Fab fragments were generated by ficin digestion and size exclusion chromatography (Fig. 4A). Affinities varied from 0.5 to 40 nM, and differences were also observed in the association and dissociation constants (Fig. 4B and Table 1). The dissociation kinetics of two antibodies (7 and 14) were biphasic, showing first a rapid dissociation followed by a slower dissociation, but as these antibodies had no remarkable agonist activity, this was not analyzed further.

Comparison of the Activity of Agonist Anti-EDAR Antibodies in Vitro and in Vivo-As we have not yet been able to identify a simple and quantitative assay to characterize EDAR agonists using EDAR's own signaling pathway in vitro, we used a surrogate reporter assay in which Fas-sensitive cells were transfected with the extracellular domain of human or mouse EDAR fused to the intracellular portion of Fas. Binding of an active recombinant EDA1 (Fc-EDA1) to these cells induces cell death by activation of the pro-apoptotic Fas pathway (13). Interestingly, only some of the antibodies (1, 3, 8, 10, and 12) (Fig. 5A) killed mEDAR:Fas-expressing cells, and even fewer killed hEDAR:Fas expressing cells (1, 3, 10, and 12) (Fig. 5B and Table 1). In all cases, antibodies were less active than Fc-EDA1 by 1-2 orders of magnitude. The picture was different in an in vivo assay, where newborn Tabby mice were treated with antibodies on the day of birth. In this case, all antibodies rescued tail hair formation in a dose-dependent manner and with similar EC 50 values of 0.1 to 0.7 mg/kg (Fig. 6). Only one of the antibodies (antibody 11) seemed less active, with an EC 50 value of about 3 mg/kg. Functional sweat glands were induced by the treatment with similar EC 50 as for tail hair (data not shown). The half-life of two antibodies (1 and 3) was determined in adult Tabby mice and found to be 10.5 and 11 days, respectively (supplemental Fig. S3).

Divalent Monomeric Agonist Antibodies Are Active in Vivo-We have shown previously that cross-linked EDA1 containing more than one trimer in a single molecule are better agonists than trimeric EDA1 (13). We therefore wondered whether the in vivo activity of agonist anti-EDAR antibodies was due to monomeric antibodies or to aggregates thereof. The activity of a monomeric (divalent) antibody purified by size exclusion chromatography (Fig. 6, antibody 1) was, however, very similar to that of the total preparation (data not shown), and compared favorably (EC 50 ϳ0.1 mg/kg) with recombinant Fc-EDA1 (EC 50 ϳ0.05 mg/kg) (Fig. 6). In addition, the F(abЈ) 2 fragment, but not the Fab fragment, was active in vivo when administered to newborn pups on the day of birth (supplemental Fig. S4). When the F(abЈ) 2 was administered later at day 3 post-birth, one of the latest time points where ventral tail hair can be induced, its action could be inhibited by an excess of the Fab fragment, ruling out that the lack of agonist activity of the Fab would be due only to a shorter half-life in vivo (supplemental Fig. S4). We conclude from these observations that a divalent agonist anti-EDAR antibody is both sufficient and necessary to exert activity in Tabby mice.

Effective Treatment of EDA-deficient Mice with Agonist Anti-EDAR Antibodies-Some patients with partially inactivating EDA mutations have teeth defects but otherwise normal skin appendages, suggesting that tooth formation may require more stringent EDAR signals than other skin appendages for proper development (14). To test the effect of agonist antibodies on tooth development, pregnant Tabby mothers were treated during pregnancy so that the antibody could be transferred to embryos by the trans-placental antibody transport system. Mice exposed to agonist anti-EDAR during development not only had tail hairs and functional sweat glands, but also hair behind the ears, mucus-secreting glands in the trachea, and a normalized eye appearance (Fig. 7, A-G, and supplemental Fig. S5). In addition, molars of treated mice were reverted and almost indistinguishable from those of wild type animals (Fig. 7, H and I, and supplemental Fig. S5). The effect was long lasting, as a similarly treated mouse was still reverted after more than 2 years (supplemental Fig. S6). Taken together, these results indicate that the two agonists anti-EDAR antibodies tested in this application (antibodies 1 and 3, Fig. 7, supplemental Fig. S4, and data not shown) revert the ectodermal dysplasia phenotypes that we have looked at in Tabby mice, including tooth morphology.

Activity of Agonist Anti-EDAR Antibodies in EDA-deficient Dogs-Agonist anti-EDAR antibodies recognize EDAR of different species (Fig. 3). To test whether the observed cross-species reactivity also holds true for the agonist activity, anti-EDAR antibody 3 was administered intravenously to three EDA-deficient dogs at either 2 days of life (n ϭ 2, 10 mg/kg) or at 14 days of life (n ϭ 1, 7 mg/kg). None of these dogs showed adverse reactions upon injection. Dentition was corrected not only in FIGURE 5. In vitro activity of anti-EDAR antibodies in a surrogate reporter assay. A, anti-EDAR antibodies and Fc-EDA1 were tested for their capacity to induce apoptosis of mEDAR:Fas-expressing Jurkat cells. After overnight culture, cell viability was determined by a cell viability assay. EC 50 are indicated as dotted lines. Anti-EDAR antibody number (or Fc-EDA1) for each curve is indicated to the right of each panel. B, as above, except that hEDAR:Fas expressing cells were used. FIGURE 6. Therapeutic doses of the anti-EDAR antibodies in newborn Tabby mice. Newborn Tabby mice were injected intraperitoneally during the first 24 h of life with graded doses of anti-EDAR antibodies, an irrelevant mouse IgG1 (Aprily 5) or Fc-EDA1. Four to 6 weeks later (antibody 2-4) or 3 weeks later (antibodies 1, 4 -14, and Aprily 5), hair density on the tail was scored according to the criteria shown in the inset. The anti-EDAR antibody 1 used in this experiment was the monomer peak obtained by gel filtration (see Fig. 4). EDA-deficient dogs that were treated at 2 days of life but also in the affected treated at 14 days of life, although the latter still lacked premolars, accounting for the decreased number of teeth (Fig. 8 and Table 2). Interestingly, the premolars and molars in dogs treated at day 2 of life had a more normal appearance than in those dogs treated with Fc-EDA (17). Lacrimation was improved in treated dogs except in one treated at day 2 of age (Table 2). The correction of glands in trachea, bronchi, and esophagus appeared, however, to be dependent on the age at which the dogs were treated, i.e. treatment administered earlier in life had a bigger impact on gland development (Fig. 8 and Table 2). It is noteworthy that, regardless of the extent of the phenotypic reversion, none of the treated dogs suffered from pneumonia or other airway diseases that are common untreated EDA-deficient dogs or from dry eye condition (keratoconjunctivitis sicca) that affect all XLHED dogs.

# DISCUSSION

Deficiency in the TNF family ligand EDA leads to ectodermal dysplasia, even if the receptor EDAR remains fully functional. The development of EDAR agonists are thus of inter-est for applications in the treatment of XLHED. EDAR is relatively well conserved across species, with only 4 amino acid differences between human and dog, 10 between human and mouse, and 13 between human and chicken in the 154amino acid-long mature extracellular domain (supplemental Fig. S7). To increase the likelihood of getting cross-reactive antibodies, EDAR-deficient mice were used to generate monoclonal antibodies. The approach proved successful as 13 of the 15 anti-EDAR antibodies analyzed recognized EDAR from human, dog, rat, mouse, and chicken. These antibodies are therefore likely to cross-react with EDARs of all mammals and many other vertebrates. Anti-EDAR15 differentiated human and dog from rat and mouse EDARs whose primary sequence only diverge in CRD1 (supplemental Fig. S7), implying that part of its epitope is in CRD1. Anti-EDAR9 recognized CRD1-3 of EDAR but none of the cysteine-rich domains taken individually or in pairs, despite the fact that these fragments were overlapping and supposed to respect structural elements of the receptor. These results indicate that EDAR may fold on itself to create a conformational epitope with regions that are distant in the primary sequence. In any case, results indicate that agonist anti-EDAR antibodies can recognize at least three distinct epitopes in EDAR.

Anti-EDAR antibodies were screened in newborn Tabby mice, a highly relevant in vivo assay whose main limitation is to detect only antibodies cross-reacting with mouse EDAR. More than half of the 46 hybridoma supernatants tested were active in this assay, indicating that agonist antibodies can readily be obtained with the procedure used. The success rate of detection was lower using the EDAR:Fas reporter cell lines that signal cell death in an oligomerization-sensitive manner, probably because these cell-based assays make use of a different intracellular signaling pathway. When combined, these assays discriminated two classes of agonist anti-EDAR antibodies, with or without in vitro activity. Interestingly, the in vitro activity correlated relatively well with low antibody dissociation constants but not with association constants or affinities (supplemental Fig. S8). The EDAR:Fas reporter cells were previously shown to discriminate recombinant WT EDA1 and EDA1 with the V365A mutation identified in a family with selective tooth agenesis, despite the fact that these two ligands bind EDAR-Fc almost equally well (14). This led to the hypothesis that formation of teeth may require higher quality EDAR signals than those needed for hair or gland formation. Thus, it is possible that agonist antibodies with activity in vitro may also be the best ones to correct tooth defects associated with EDA deficiency. It will be interesting to experimentally test this hypothesis in the future.

The plethora of anti-EDAR agonist antibodies obtained, most of which were of the IgG1 isotype, was surprising. Indeed, there are indications that agonist anti-Fas antibodies (Fas is another TNFR family member) need to be oligomerized to be active. For example, the CH11 IgM monoclonal antibody directed against human Fas was obtained by immunization of mice with membranes of FS-7 human fibroblasts (27). When an IgG1 recognizing the exact same epitope (mAb ZB4) or a divalent F(abЈ) 2 of CH11 was used, there was no agonist activity (28). A second example of an agonist  monoclonal antibody directed against human Fas is APO-1, which was obtained by immunizing mice with plasma membranes of the human SKW 6.4 cell line (29). This antibody is an IgG3. Upon isotype switch, it loses its agonist activity (30), a result that was tentatively explained by the propensity of IgG3 to self-aggregate. As immunoglobulin preparations often contain low amounts of high molecular weight antibody aggregates (31), we wondered whether the agonist activity of anti-EDAR antibodies could be due to aggregates. This was not the case, however, as monomeric antibodies had a similar specific activity in vivo as the total preparation. In addition, a purified F(abЈ) 2 fragment was agonist in vivo, whereas the Fab fragment was not. We conclude that divalency is necessary and sufficient for anti-EDAR agonist antibodies to exert their activity.

We have shown previously that the collagen domain of EDA oligomerizes the trimeric TNF homology domain of EDA1 into higher order structures with concomitant gain of activity (13). Similarly, Fc-EDA1 that assembles as a hexamer (containing two EDA1 trimers) is a highly active molecule. One interpretation is that multiple EDAR molecules must be recruited within the same complex to deliver robust intracellular signals, but this is in apparent contradiction with the observation that divalent antibodies are good agonists. A first hypothesis to reconcile these observations is that EDAR may pre-exist as inactive complexes before ligand binding, as shown previously for Fas (32). Binding of a ligand may change the conformation of the complex to render it signaling-competent and bring together two such complexes to initiate signaling. Divalent agonist antibodies may mimic hexavalent ligands by inducing the conformational change by binding one receptor in the pre-assembled complex and recruiting and activating a second complex on its second arm. In a second hypothesis, binding of the ligand or the antibody at an appropriate site of EDAR is sufficient to render the receptor signaling-competent. Assembly of the signaling complex may be relatively slow and reversible if the agonist detaches prematurely from the receptor. In this model, efficient signaling could be obtained either with divalent reagents with low dissociation constants or with ligands that compensate relatively high dissociation constants by multivalency. Whatever their mechanism of action, Fc-EDA1 and agonist anti-EDAR antibodies are in practice excellent agonists to cure animal models of XLHED, including their teeth defects. Because of their long half-life in vivo, agonist anti-EDAR antibodies will prove useful reagents for long term experiments, especially in mice where these mouse antibodies should elicit minimal neutralizing immune responses.

Finally, it is noteworthy that keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eye) that affects all untreated EDA-deficient dogs is believed to be caused by decreased tear production. Tear production improved significantly in two of the treated dogs but not in a third one (E237). Nevertheless, none of the dogs treated in this study with agonist anti-EDAR antibody required therapy for dry eye or any other ocular disorders. These findings suggest that decreased tear production is not the only factor causing dry eyes but that other structures such as Meibomian glands that lubricate the eye, or the composition of the lipids therein, also play an important role.

