# DESCRIPTION

## FIELD OF THE INVENTION

The present invention concerns the preparation of substantially purified agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof. The invention further relates to isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof as well as their use in the treatment of X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia and tooth agenesis. The invention also relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising said isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof and to a method of treating X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia and tooth agenesis. Finally, the present invention concerns a pharmaceutical kit comprising said isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof.

## BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

The ectodermal dysplasias (EDs) are congenital, diffuse, and nonprogressive. The EDs comprise a large, heterogeneous group of inherited disorders that share primary defects in the development of 2 or more tissues derived from embryonic ectoderm. To date, more than 192 distinct disorders have been described. The most common EDs are X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (Christ-Siemens-Touraine syndrome) and hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (Clouston syndrome). The X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is also known and hereinafter referred to as XLHED.

The tissues primarily involved are the skin, hair, nails, eccrine glands, and teeth. A reduction in the number of hair follicles in conjunction with structural hair shaft abnormalities may be seen.

Structural hair shaft abnormalities may result from aberrations in hair bulb formation and include longitudinal grooving, hair shaft torsion, and cuticle ruffling. Hair bulbs may be distorted, bifid, and small.

Eccrine sweat glands may be absent or sparse and rudimentary, particularly in patients with hypohidrotic ED.

Hypoplasia of the salivary and lacrimal glands may occur. In some patients, mucous glands may be absent in the upper respiratory tract and in the bronchi, esophagus, and duodenum.

Abnormal morphogenesis or absence of teeth may occur.

Abnormal nail plate formation may result in brittle, thin, ridged, or grossly deformed nails.

The mortality rate in early infancy (below 2 years old) approaches 30%. Morbidity and mortality is related to the absence or dysfunction of eccrine and mucous glands. Beyond early childhood, life expectancy ranges from normal to slightly reduced.

An activator protein, the ectodysplasin isoform A1 (Eda-A1, hereinafter referred to as EDA1) which is required for normal development of several ectodermally derived organs in humans and mice has been identified. This molecule is coded by the ectodysplasin gene (EDA) and belongs to the tumor necrosis factor family. The ectodysplasin gene codes for 2 proteins isoforms, EDA1 and EDA2, which bind to and activate two different receptors, EDA1 receptor (EDAR) and X-linked EDA1 receptor (XEDAR), respectively. The EDA1 receptor is hereinafter referred to as EDAR.

XLHED is characterized by the absence or the functional deficiency of EDA1, the ligand of EDAR.

Studies have been performed to characterize the origin of XLHED and to find appropriate treatments. Most of these studies have been done on Tabby mice which share many symptoms with human XLHED patients. The phenotype of Tabby mice, like in human XLHED patients, is caused by mutations in the EDA gene located on the X chromosome.

Different approaches have been studied to treat XLHED.

One of these approaches is the use of recombinant proteins containing the receptor-binding domain of Eda-A1 fused to the C-terminus of an IgG1 Fc domain. The publication “Permanent correction of an inherited ectodermal dysplasia with recombinant EDA”, O. Gaide et al., Nature Medicine, vol. 9, number 5, pp 614-618, May 2003, describes the administration of recombinant EDA1 to developing embryos and newborn Tabby mice in order to correct the phenotype and provide a basis for a possible treatment of XLHED.

Such an approach is also described in US Patent 2005/152,872 (Gaide et al.). In particular this document discloses a recombinant fusion protein containing an amino-acid sequence which comprises: (a) the Fc section or part of an Fc section of an immunoglobulin as component (A) or a functional variant of component (A); (b) the extracellular part of a TNF ligand or a partial sequence of the extracellular part of a TNF ligand as component (B) or a functional variant of component (B); and optionally (c) a transition area between component (A) and component (B), containing a linker.

Another approach is disclosed in U.S. Pat. No. 6,355,782 (Zonana et al.) and U.S. Pat. No. 7,115,555 (Zonana et al.). In these documents a nucleic acid sequence encoding a human EDA1, methods and compositions for increasing or decreasing the development of cells or tissues of ectodermal origin, such as hair, teeth, skin, and/or sweat glands, by altering EDA1 activity in a cell or tissue are described. EDA1 activity can be increased or decreased using the EDA1, dl and DL gene, cDNA and protein sequences (and variants, polymorphisms and mutants thereof), as well as anti-sense molecules and specific binding agents disclosed herein alone or with a pharmaceutical carrier.

Considering that antibodies are the most widely used type of therapeutic proteins, that the safety, long half-life, good bio-availability, ease of production and controlled cost of manufacturing for the antibodies are apparently well established, such an approach was envisioned in US 2003/0023991 (Zonana et al.). In particular this document describes DNA and amino acid sequences for the protein ligand (EDA1-II) and receptors (dl and DL) involved in ectodermal dysplasia. Also disclosed are variant DNA and amino acid sequences, and therapeutic applications of the ligands and receptors. Also described are different potential applications in which administration of antibody against EDAR (dl/DL) may be used. This application in particular describes the use of antagonists against dl/DL (EDAR receptor). According to this application, these antagonists can be used to reduce hair growth, for example in the treatment of hirsutism, to inhibit tooth development, such as ectopic teeth, to selectively eliminate sweat glands, for example on the upper lip or under the arm, and to inhibit breast epithelial cell proliferation, for example in the treatment of breast cancer or other trauma of the skin. Finally, the production and use of monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies are envisioned. However, no specific sequences of antibodies against EDAR either agonists or antagonists are described in this document. No working examples are provided in order to evidence that monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies are biologically active, effective and functional.

It might be stated that the selection of monoclonal antibodies is a routine work for a person skilled in the art. However, one cannot acknowledge that the preparation and obtainment of isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies was routine and does not involve inventive step. For example, the CH11 monoclonal antibody directed against human Fas, another TNF receptor family member, was obtained by immunization of mice with membranes of FS-7 human fibroblasts (Yonehara et al, 1989, J. Exp. Med 169. 1747-1756). CH11 is an IgM. When an IgG1 recognizing the exact same epitope (mAb ZB4) or a divalent Fab′2 of CH11 was used, there was no agonist activity (Fadeel et al, 1997, Int Immunol 9, 201-209). A second example of an agonist monoclonal antibody against human Fas is APO-1. The APO-1 monoclonal antibody against human Fas was obtained by immunizing mice with plasma membrane of the human SKW 6.4 cell line (Trauth et al, 1989, Science 245, 301-305). This antibody is an IgG3. Upon isotype switch, this antibody looses its agonist activity (Dhein et al, 1992, J. Immunol. 149, 3166-3173), although the Fas-binding portion of the antibody remains the same. This result was tentatively explained by the propensity of IgG3 to self-aggregate. These two examples indicate that the obtainment of agonist monoclonal antibodies against a TNF receptor family member is absolutely not trivial to a skilled in the art.

In the context of the present invention, Applicants had to face several problems as follows:

Commercial polyclonal anti-EDAR antibodies (raised in the goat, from R&D Systems) failed to induce death of EDAR:Fas-transduced Jurkat cells. One could believe that the polyclonal antibody preparations were made of a mixture of antibodies with various activities (agonist, antagonist, etc.). It was therefore Applicant's disappointment to observe that the cell-based assay did not reveal any agonist activity, even when using a large quantity of antibody. These results were not encouraging for the development of agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies.

The development of an EDA1-dependent biological assay was found difficult for several reasons. First, there are only few cell lines, which endogenously express EDAR (one example is the human keratinocyte cell line HaCat). Several human, mouse and rat keratinocyte cell lines were screened for EDAR expression. This was done by staining cells with Fc-EDA1 and the anti-EDAR mAb, as detected by flow cytometry. None of the cell lines was found to express detectable levels of EDAR. Second, an N{tilde over (F)} B-dependent read-out system was found not satisfying (phosphorylation and degradation of I B), because it was neither quantitative, nor fully reproducible. In order to overcome these limitations, it was finally attempted to introduce in EDAR-transfected fibroblasts a reporter gene (e.g. luciferase) under the control of the N{tilde over (F)} B promoter. However, this system was also found not to result in a biological activity assay working properly (low signal to noise ratio and low sensitivity). Therefore the use of the techniques known to the skilled in the art was not found satisfactory.

The naturally occurring soluble EDA1 protein is probably a multimer of trimers (Swee et al, J. Biol. Chem. 284:27267-76, 2009), and Fc-EDA1 is an hexameric ligand. As it has been extensively documented for Fas, the Applicants have obtained evidence that the simultaneous engagement and clustering of multiple EDAR receptors was necessary for biological activity (Swee et al, J. Biol. Chem. 284:27267-76, 2009). By contrast, anti-EDAR antibodies are only divalent. It was therefore not likely that this molecular format would be as biologically active as Fc-EDA1.

No convenient animal model was available. Without the identification of a convenient strain of mice (EDAR-deficient mice), the development of antibodies according to the invention would have been considerably hampered. It is assumed that in the absence of Applicant's proposed animal model and specific preparation process, anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies with agonist properties would have not been obtained (i.e. because they would have had distinct binding sites on EDAR).

However, there is a need for more effective treatment for XLHED and for increasing the quality of life of those suffering from this disease. In particular no curative treatment of children, young adults or adults suffering from ectodermal dysplasia such as XLHED or tooth agenesis is presently available.

The aim of the present invention is to provide a new process for the preparation of substantially purified and isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies that are biologically active, effective and functional. The present invention also allows to rapidly discriminating the best agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies. The present invention also demonstrates that the use of agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies represent drug candidates for the treatment of the XLHED or related diseases.

These and other objects as will be apparent from the foregoing have been achieved by the present invention.

## SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

In a first embodiment, the present invention concerns a method for producing agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof comprising the steps of:


- - a) producing EDAR antigen, or EDAR fragment, or EDAR fusion protein
    of mouse and/or human and/or vertebrate species
  - b) immunizing EDAR-deficient mice with said EDAR antigen or EDAR
    fragment, or EDAR fusion protein
  - c) detection of anti-EDAR antibodies in the serum of said EDAR
    antigen or EDAR fragment, or EDAR fusion protein-immunized
    EDAR-deficient mice
  - d) producing hybridomas between lymph node cells from EDAR antigen
    or EDAR fragment, or EDAR fusion protein-immunized, EDAR-deficient
    mice and myeloma cells
  - e) identifying agonist anti-EDAR antibodies or isolated monoclonal
    antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof
    recognizing human and/or mouse EDAR and/or EDAR from vertebrate
    species
    - i. by binding assays designed to detect binding between the said
      agonist anti-EDAR antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody
      fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof and
      human and/or mouse EDAR antigen or EDAR fragment, or EDAR fusion
      protein; and
    - ii. for their ability to induce a biological response in vitro in
      cells or tissues expressing EDAR or an EDAR fusion protein.
    - iii. for their ability to induce a biological response in vivo in
      organisms expressing EDAR or EDAR fusion proteins.
  - f) selecting hybridomas lines for the agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal
    antibodies they produce on the basis of steps e) ii and e) iii
  - g) cloning and sub-cloning of said selected hybridoma lines
  - h) purifying the resulting agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies
    or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding
    portions or fragments thereof.

In a second embodiment, the present invention provides isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof obtainable by this process, and wherein said isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof bind to human and/or mouse EDAR with an affinity (KD) of at least 10−8 M for the Fab fragment. In addition, the said isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof that cross-react with mouse EDAR induce tail hair formation and/or sweat gland formation with an EC50 of less than 20 mg/kg when administered to newborn Tabby mice, as described in example 7.

Also disclosed are the isolated nucleic acid molecules encoding the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof of the invention as well as an expression vector comprising at least one copy of said nucleic acid molecules.

Host cells comprising the expression vector of the invention, hybridoma secreting the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof and transgenic non-human animals having a genome comprising said isolated nucleic acid molecule and/or the expression vector are also disclosed.

Furthermore, the present invention relates to a pharmaceutical composition comprising the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof of the present invention, and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier.

A further object of the invention concerns the use of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition, for the preparation of a medication for modulating the development of cells or tissues of ectodermal origin, such as hair, teeth, skin, sweat glands, sebaceous glands, larynx and trachea mucus-producing cells, Meibomian glands, preputial glands, mammary glands and salivary glands.

Another object of the invention comprises the use of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition, in the manufacture of a medicament for the reconstitution of the skin or for modifying hair morphology.

Also provided is a method of increasing the development of one or more hair follicle, tooth, sweat gland, sebaceous glands, larynx and trachea mucus-producing cells, Meibomian glands, preputial glands, mammary glands and salivary glands in a tissue, comprising administering to a subject in need thereof, the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention.

Finally, the present invention concerns a pharmaceutical kit comprising at least an effective amount of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention, together with instructions for use.

Other objects and advantages will become apparent to those skilled in the art from a review of the ensuing detailed description, which proceeds with reference to the following illustrative drawings, and the attendant claims.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION

As used herein, the following definitions are supplied in order to facilitate the understanding of the present invention.

“A” or “an” means “at least one” or “one or more.”

The term “comprise” is generally used in the sense of include, that is to say permitting the presence of one or more features or components.

As used herein, the terms “protein”, “polypeptide”, “polypeptidic”, “peptide” and “peptidic” or “peptidic chain” are used interchangeably herein to designate a series of amino acid residues connected to the other by peptide bonds between the alpha-amino and carboxy groups of adjacent residues.

“Amino acid residue” means any amino acid residue known to those skilled in the art. This encompasses naturally occurring amino acids (including for instance, using the three-letter code, Ala, Arg, Asn, Asp, Cys, Gln, Glu, Gly, His, Ile, Leu, Lys, Met, Phe, Pro, Ser, Thr, Trp, Tyr, Val), as well as rare and/or synthetic amino acids and derivatives thereof (including for instance Aad, Abu, Acp, Ahe, Aib, Apm, Dbu, Des, Dpm, Hyl, McLys, McVal, Nva, and the like).

Said amino acid residue or derivative thereof can be any isomer, especially any chiral isomer, e.g. the L- or D-isoform.

By amino acid derivative, we hereby mean any amino acid derivative as known in the art. For instance, amino acid derivatives include residues derivable from natural amino acids bearing additional side chains, e.g. alkyl side chains, and/or heteroatom substitutions.

The term “purified” does not require absolute purity; rather, it is intended as a relative term. Thus, for example, a purified agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibody preparation is one in which the protein is more pure than the protein in its natural environment within a cell. Preferably, a preparation of agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibody is purified such that the protein represents at least 50% of the total protein content of the preparation.

As used herein, the expression “substantially pure” refers to material that is at least 50% pure, preferably at least 90% pure, more preferably at least 95% pure, even more preferably at least 98% pure and most preferably 99% pure, or with greater purity.

An “isolated antibody”, as used herein, is intended to refer to an antibody which is substantially free of other antibodies having different antigenic specificities (e.g., an isolated antibody that specifically binds to EDAR is substantially free of antibodies that specifically bind antigens other than EDAR). An isolated antibody that specifically binds to an epitope, isoform or variant of human EDAR may, however, have cross-reactivity to other related antigens, e.g., from other species (e.g., EDAR species homologues). Moreover, an isolated antibody may be substantially free of other cellular material and/or chemicals. In one embodiment of the invention, a combination of “isolated” monoclonal antibodies having different specificities are combined in a well defined composition.

“Disease”, as used herein, refers to a pathological condition of a part, organ, or system of an organism resulting from various causes, such as infection, genetic defect, or environmental stress, and characterized by an identifiable group of signs or symptoms.

The term “subject” refers to patients of human or other vertebrates in particular mammal and includes any individual it is desired to examine or treat using the methods according to the present invention. However, it will be understood that “patient” does not automatically imply that symptoms or diseases are present. As used herein, the term “patient” preferably refers to a human in need of treatment to treat XLHED.

“Mammal” for purposes of treatment refers to any animal classified as a mammal, including humans, domestic and farm animals, and zoo, sports, or pet animals, such as dogs, horses, cats, cows, monkeys etc. Preferably, the mammal is a human.

“Vertebrate” for purposes of treatments refers to any animal classified as a vertebrate, including birds, amphibians and fishes. Preferably, the vertebrate is a human.

“Treatment” refers to both therapeutic treatment and prophylactic or preventive measures. Those in need of treatment include those already with the disorder as well as those in which the disorder is to be prevented. Hence, the mammal to be treated herein may have been diagnosed as having the disorder or may be predisposed or susceptible to the disorder. Thus the term “treatment” or “treating” herein encompasses curative treatment, preventive treatment as well as palliative treatment, more specifically palliative treatment and curative treatment. For the purpose of this invention, the “treatment” is an approach for obtaining beneficial results including, but not limited to, one or more of the following: reducing or totally destroying of the symptoms of the XLHED disease and decreasing the frequency of mortality by patients.

The phrase “pharmaceutically acceptable” refers to molecular entities and compositions that are physiologically tolerable and do not typically produce an allergic or similar untoward reaction, such as gastric upset, dizziness and the like, when administered to a patient in particular to a human.

The expression “effective amount” is an amount sufficient to effect beneficial or desired results including, without limitation, clinical results, preventing or attenuating symptoms resulting from the disease, decreasing the dose of other medicaments required to treat the disease. An effective amount can be administered in one or more administrations of the active substance. For the purpose of this invention, the active substance is a molecular composition inducing a biological activity when interacting with EDAR (EDAR modulator).

In the present invention, the term “receptor” refers to a structure on the surface of a cell (or inside a cell) that selectively receives and binds a specific molecule which affects the activities of the cell.

The term “antigen” refers to a molecule or a portion of a molecule capable of being bound by a selective binding agent, such as an antibody, and additionally capable of being used in an animal to elicit the production of antibodies capable of binding to an epitope of that antigen. An antigen may have one or more epitopes.

The term “antibody”, as used herein, refers to a protein produced by the immune system that protects the organism against an antigen. But, as used herein, the term encompasses not only intact monoclonal antibodies but also fragments thereof, single chains, mutants thereof, naturally occurring variants, fusion proteins comprising an antibody portion with an antigen recognition site of the required specificity, humanized antibodies, chimeric antibodies, and any other modified configuration of the immunoglobulin molecule that comprises an antigen recognition site of the required specificity. An intact “antibody” comprises at least two heavy (H) chains and two light (L) chains inter-connected by disulfide bonds. Each heavy chain is comprised of a heavy chain variable region (abbreviated herein as HCVR or VH) and a heavy chain constant region. The heavy chain constant region is comprised of three domains, CH1, CH2 and CH3. Each light chain is comprised of a light chain variable region (abbreviated herein as LCVR or VL) and a light chain constant region. The light chain constant region is comprised of one domain, CL. The VH and VL regions can be further subdivided into regions of hypervariability, termed complementarity determining regions (CDR), interspersed with regions that are more conserved, termed framework regions (FR). Each VH and VL is composed of three CDRs and four FRs, arranged from amino-terminus to carboxyl-terminus in the following order: FR1, CDR1, FR2, CDR2, FR3, CDR3, FR4.

The variable regions of the heavy and light chains contain a binding domain that interacts with an antigen. The constant regions of the antibodies may mediate the binding of the immunoglobulin to host tissues or factors, including various cells of the immune system (e.g., effector cells) and the first component (Clq) of the classical complement system.

The term “agonist” refers to a drug/ligand/antibody which binds to a receptor and activates it, producing a pharmacological response (e.g. contraction, relaxation, secretion, enzyme activation, etc.).

The terms “monoclonal antibody” (mAb) or “monoclonal antibody composition” as used herein refer to a preparation of antibody molecules of single molecular composition. A monoclonal antibody composition displays a single binding specificity and affinity for a particular epitope. The term “epitope” means a protein determinant capable of specific binding to an antibody. Epitopes usually consist of chemically active surface groupings of molecules such as amino acids or sugar side chains and usually have specific three dimensional structural characteristics, as well as specific charge characteristics.

The phrases “an antibody recognizing an antigen” and “an antibody specific for an antigen” are used interchangeably herein with the term “an antibody which binds specifically to an antigen.”

The term “antigen-binding portion” of an antibody (or simply “antibody portion”), as used herein, refers to one or more fragments of an intact antibody that retain the ability to specifically bind to an antigen (e.g., EDAR). It has been shown that the antigen-binding function of an antibody can be performed by fragments of a full-length antibody. Examples of binding include (i) a Fab fragment, a monovalent fragment consisting of the VL, VH, CL and CH1 domains; (ii) a F (ab)′ 2 fragment, a bivalent fragment comprising two Fab fragments linked by a disulfide bridge at the hinge region; (iii) a Fd fragment consisting of the VH and CH1 domains; (iv) a Fv fragment consisting of the VL and VH domains of a single arm of an antibody, (v) a dAb fragment (Ward et al., (1989) Nature 341: 544-546), which consists of a VH domain; and (vi) an isolated complementarity determining region (CDR); and (vii) a nanobody, a heavy chain variable region containing a single variable domain and two constant domains. Furthermore, although the two domains of the Fv fragment, VL and VH, are coded for by separate genes, they can be joined, using recombinant methods, by a synthetic linker that enables them to be made as a single protein chain in which the VL and VH regions pair to form monovalent molecules (known as single chain Fv (scFv); see e.g., Huston et al (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sc USA 85:5879-5883). Such single chain antibodies are also intended to be encompassed within the term “antigen-binding portion” of an antibody. These antibody fragments are obtained using conventional techniques known to those with skill in the art, and the fragments are screened for utility in the same manner as are intact antibodies.

“Fragments” refer to sequences sharing at least 40% amino acids in length with the respective sequence of the intact or full length agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies (native). These sequences can be used as long as they exhibit the same properties as the native sequence from which they derive. Preferably these sequences share more than 70%, preferably more than 80%, in particular more than 90% amino acids in length with the respective sequence the intact or full length agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies.

In the case of an agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibody of the invention, useful fragments include, but are not limited to: a CDR region, especially a CDR3 region of the heavy or light chain; a variable domain of a heavy or light chain; a portion of an antibody chain or just its variable region including two CDRs; and the like. Suitable agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibody fragments of the invention are immunologically functional immunoglobulins. The term “immunologically functional immunoglobulin fragment” as used herein refers to a polypeptide fragment that contains at least the CDRs of the immunoglobulin heavy and light chains. An immunologically functional immunoglobulin fragment of the invention is capable of specifically binding to EDAR. Most preferably, the fragment binds specifically to and/or modulates the biological activity of EDAR.

In a first embodiment, the present invention concerns a method for producing agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof comprising the steps of:


- - a) producing EDAR antigen, or EDAR fragment, or EDAR fusion protein
    of mouse and/or human and/or vertebrate species
  - b) immunizing EDAR-deficient mice with said EDAR antigen or EDAR
    fragment, or EDAR fusion protein
  - c) detection of anti-EDAR antibodies in the serum of said EDAR
    antigen or EDAR fragment, or EDAR fusion protein-immunized
    EDAR-deficient mice
  - d) producing hybridomas between lymph node cells from EDAR antigen
    or EDAR fragment, or EDAR fusion protein-immunized, EDAR-deficient
    mice and myeloma cells
  - e) identifying agonist anti-EDAR antibodies or isolated monoclonal
    antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof
    recognizing human and/or mouse EDAR and/or EDAR from any vertebrate
    species
    - i. by binding assays designed to detect binding between the said
      agonist anti-EDAR antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody
      fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof and
      human and/or mouse EDAR antigen or EDAR fragment, or EDAR fusion
      protein; and
    - ii. for their ability to induce a biological response in vitro in
      cells or tissues expressing EDAR or an EDAR fusion protein.
    - iii. for their ability to induce a biological response in vivo in
      organisms expressing EDAR or EDAR fusion proteins.
  - f) selecting hybridomas lines for the agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal
    antibodies they produce on the basis of steps e) ii and e) iii
  - g) cloning and sub-cloning of said selected hybridoma lines
  - h) purifying the resulting agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies
    or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding
    portions or fragments thereof.

Preferably, the EDAR antigen of step a) is human EDAR, or mouse EDAR, or EDAR from another mammalian species, or EDAR from another vertebrate species.

Preferably, the EDAR antigen of step a) is a cell line naturally expressing full length EDAR or transfected with full length EDAR, or the EDAR antigen is a soluble EDAR fragment, or the EDAR antigen is a fusion protein between the extracellular domain of EDAR and another protein, or the EDAR antigen is part of a virus-like particle.

More preferably, the EDAR antigen is expressed in a cell line syngenic with mice of step b), or the EDAR antigen is fused to the Fc portion of an IgG.

Even more preferably, the EDAR antigen is human or mouse EDAR fused to the Fc portion of human IgG1.

As an alternative to steps b), c) and d), anti-EDAR antibodies, or fragment thereof such as single chain Fv can be obtained by selecting antibody sequences by phage display on the antigen of step a).

Preferably, the binding assays of step e) is carried out by applying visualizing methods comprising ELISA, dot blot, Western blot, RIA, immunoprecipitation, flow cytometry, fluorescence microscopy, electron microscopy, confocal microscopy, calorimetry, plasmon resonance, test of Ouchterlony, complement-mediated lysis of red blood cells, antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity and the like.

More preferably, the binding assays of step e) i is carried out by direct or capture ELISA.

Preferably, the biological in vitro assay of step e) ii is the measure of placode formations in embryonic skin of Tabby mouse embryos ex vivo (Mustonen et al. Ectodysplasin A1 promotes placodal fate during early morphogenesis of ectodermal appendages, Development 131:4907-4919, 2004), the measure of NF-kB activation in EDAR-positive cells, or the measure of apoptosis of Fas-deficient Jurkat cells transduced with chimeric human and/or mouse EDAR-Fas receptor.

More preferably, the biological in vitro assay of step e) ii is the measure of apoptosis of Fas-deficient Jurkat cells transduced with chimeric human and/or mouse EDAR-Fas receptor

Preferably, the biological in vivo assay of step e) iii is the measure of tail hair formation and/or the measure of functional sweat glands formation upon administration to newborn EDA-deficient Tabby mice.

In particular, the purification of step h) is carried out by protein A or G affinity chromatography or by protein L, anti-mouse IgG antibody-based affinity chromatography, ion exchange, ethanol or ammonium sulfate precipitation and the like.

Methods for preparing an immunogen and immunizing an animal are well-known in the art (Kohler and Milstein 1975 Nature 256:495-497; Brown et al. 1981 J Immunol 127:539-46; Brown et al., 1980 J Biol Chem 255:4980-83; Yeh et al., 1976 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 76:2927-31; Yeh et al., 1982 Int J Cancer 29:269-75; Kozbor et al., 1983 Immunol Today 4:72; Cole et al., 1985 Monoclonal Antibodies and Cancer Therapy, Alan R. Liss, Inc., pp. 77-96; U.S. Pat. No. 4,816,567; Clackson, et al., 1991 Nature 352:624-628; Marks, et al., 1991 J Mol Biol 222:581-597).

One of the preferred embodiments for obtaining agonist anti-EDAR antibodies is as follows:


- - a) produce human EDAR-Fc and mouse EDAR-Fc fusion proteins.
  - b) immunize OVE1B EDAR-deficient mice with human EDAR-Fc fusion
    protein and immunize OVE1B EDAR-deficient mice with mouse EDAR-Fc
    fusion protein.
  - c) detect anti-EDAR antibodies in the serum of immunized
    EDAR-deficient mice.
  - d) produce hybridomas between lymph node cells from
    EDAR-Fc-immunized, EDAR-deficient mice and myeloma cells.
  - e) identify hybridoma of interest for their ability to specifically
    recognize human and mouse EDAR-Fc, but not an irrelevant Fc fusion
    protein by ELISA.
  - f) identify hybridoma of point e) producing agonist anti-EDAR
    antibodies by administering unpurified supernatants to newborn Tabby
    mice, and select those that induce tail hair formation and/or sweat
    gland formation.
  - g) sub-clone and amplify hybridoma selected in point f), transfer
    them in serum-free medium and purify antibodies from serum-free
    supernatants by protein G affinity chromatography. Dose purified
    antibodies by their absorbance at 280 nm.
  - h) titrate purified anti-EDAR antibodies of point g) on
    Fas-deficient Jurkat cells transduced with chimeric human EDAR-Fas
    receptor and on Fas-deficient Jurkat cells transduced with chimeric
    human EDAR-Fas receptor. Determine their EC50 of apoptosis
    induction.
  - i) titrate purified anti-EDAR antibodies of point g) in newborn
    Tabby mice and determine the EC50 of their ability to induce tail
    hair formation and/or sweat gland formation.
  - j) select anti-EDAR antibodies with the lowest EC50 in tests of
    points h) and i).
  - Antibody sequences obtained by this process are those of mAbEDAR1-15
    (SEQ ID \#169-196), preferably those of mAbEDAR1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
    10, 12, 13 and 14 (SEQ ID#169, 171-177, 179-181, 183, 185, 186-191
    and 193-195), even more preferably those of mAbEDAR1, 3, 10 and 12
    (SEQ ID#169, 171, 177, 179, 183, 185, 191 and 193).

A preferred method for producing agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof is illustrated in example 1.

Surprisingly, Applicants have observed some unanticipated results obtained with the process according to the invention.

In particular, in order to develop an EDA1-dependent biological activity assay, which was sensitive and specific for the multimerized form of EDA1, cell lines were developed (EDAR-Fas-transduced and Fas-negative Jurkat cell lines). The use of a Fas-negative recipient cell line might be needed, as Fas-positive cells would result in cell lines with an inappropriate sensitivity to EDAR agonists. It was then found that the cell lines, which were working properly for this assay, expressed low levels of the transduced EDAR-Fas fusion protein. If selection of the cell lines would have been based on the expression of the transgene, one could expect that one would have selected the cells expressing high levels of the transgene. One could predict that this would have not resulted in the successful identification of suitable cell lines. These unanticipated results can be now rationalized by explaining that a high level of transgene causes apoptosis, even in the absence of ligand. These cells are thus rapidly eliminated before selection. The cells that nevertheless expressed high levels of the EDAR-Fas fusion protein were insensitive, most probably because they had mutated downstream elements in the signaling pathway.

Another important point is that EDAR-Fas-expressing cells allowed to rapidly sorting agonist anti-EDAR antibodies into two categories: those that displayed, and those that did not displayed in vitro activity on these cells. Those antibodies able to activate EDAR-Fas expressing cells were also very often those with the lowest affinity constants, and the lowest dissociation constants. It may be anticipated that these antibodies will also be those with the best activity on toot development. EDA signals required for proper tooth development are indeed believed to be stronger or of better quality than those required for the development of other ectodermal appendages (Mues et al., Eur. J. Hum. Gen. 18:19-25, 2010).

A third important point of interest is that the classical approach for the development of monoclonal antibodies consists in the immunization of wild type mice with the human protein antigens. In this situation, antibodies specific for determinants differing between the mouse and the human proteins are obtained. In order to generate agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies cross-reacting with both mouse and human EDAR, Applicants have used the EDAR-deficient mice OVEB1 (the EDAR signaling-defective mice downless and sleek would not have been suitable, as they still express the extracellular region of the EDAR polypeptide). This approach is believed to have maximized the diversity of anti-EDAR antibodies Applicants have generated. The OVEB1 mouse strain is not commercially available. This situation renders this approach problematic for most people who would like to develop agonist anti-EDAR antibodies. At the beginning, Applicants attempted to develop anti-EDA1 antibodies by immunizing wild type mice with recombinant EDA1 protein (the portion which is 100% identical between human and mouse). No useful antibodies were obtained. By contrast, when Tabby mice (EDA-deficient mice) were immunized with EDA1, anti-EDA1 monoclonal antibodies were obtained.

Applicants further note that following in vitro screening, the agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies were screened in vivo by injecting them in newborn Tabby mice. This in vivo assay is certainly not a standard test, which can be easily performed by scientists without experience in the field.

Another object of the invention is to provide an isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof obtainable by the above-described process and wherein said isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof bind to human and/or mouse EDAR with an affinity constant (KD) of at least 10−8 M for the Fab fragment. The specific binding according to the invention presents a high affinity. In addition, the said isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof that cross-react with mouse EDAR induce tail hair formation and/or sweat gland formation with an EC50 of less than 20 mg/kg when administered to newborn Tabby mice, as described in example 7.

As used herein, “specific binding” refers to antibody binding to a predetermined antigen. Typically, the antibody binds with a affinity constant (KD) of 10−8 M or less for the Fab fragment, and binds to the predetermined antigen with a KD that is at least ten-fold less than its KD for binding to a non-specific antigen (e.g., BSA, casein) other than the predetermined antigen or a closely-related antigen. The phrases “an antibody recognizing an antigen” and “an antibody specific for an antigen” are used interchangeably herein with the term “an antibody which binds specifically to an antigen”.

The term “Kassoc” or “Ka”, as used herein, is intended to refer to the association rate of a particular antibody-antigen interaction, whereas the term “KdiS” or “Kd” is intended to refer to the dissociation rate of a particular antibody-antigen interaction. The term “high affinity” for an IgG antibody refers to an affinity constant (KD) for the Fab fragment of at least about 10−8M, at least about 10−9M, at least about 10−10 M, at least about 10−11M, or at least about 10−12 M or greater, e.g., up to 10−13M or 10−14 M or greater. However, “high affinity” binding can vary for other antibody isotypes.

Preferably, the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof, that specifically bind human and mouse EDAR, comprise: a heavy chain variable region comprising the complementary determining region amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NO:1, SEQ ID NO: 2, SEQ ID NO: 3, or SEQ ID NO:7, SEQ ID NO: 8, SEQ ID NO: 9, or SEQ ID NO:13, SEQ ID NO: 14, SEQ ID NO: 15, or SEQ ID NO:19, SEQ ID NO: 20, SEQ ID NO: 21, or SEQ ID NO:25, SEQ ID NO: 26, SEQ ID NO: 27, or SEQ ID NO:31, SEQ ID NO: 32, SEQ ID NO: 33, or SEQ ID NO: 37, SEQ ID NO: 38, SEQ ID NO: 39, or SEQ ID NO: 43, SEQ ID NO: 44, SEQ ID NO: 45, or SEQ ID NO: 49, SEQ ID NO: 50, SEQ ID NO: 51, or SEQ ID NO: 55, SEQ ID NO: 56, SEQ ID NO: 57, or SEQ ID NO: 61, SEQ ID NO: 62, SEQ ID NO: 63, or SEQ ID NO: 67, SEQ ID NO: 68, SEQ ID NO: 69, or SEQ ID NO: 73, SEQ ID NO: 74, SEQ ID NO: 75, or SEQ ID NO: 79, SEQ ID NO: 80, SEQ ID NO: 81 and a light chain variable region comprising the complementary determining region amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NO:4, SEQ ID NO: 5, SEQ ID NO: 6 or SEQ ID NO:10, SEQ ID NO: 11, SEQ ID NO: 12, or SEQ ID NO:16, SEQ ID NO: 17, SEQ ID NO: 18, or SEQ ID NO:22, SEQ ID NO: 23, SEQ ID NO: 24, or SEQ ID NO:28, SEQ ID NO: 29, SEQ ID NO: 30, or SEQ ID NO:34, SEQ ID NO: 35, SEQ ID NO: 36, or SEQ ID NO: 40, SEQ ID NO: 41, SEQ ID NO: 42, or SEQ ID NO: 46, SEQ ID NO: 47, SEQ ID NO: 48, or SEQ ID NO: 52, SEQ ID NO: 53, SEQ ID NO: 54, or SEQ ID NO: 58, SEQ ID NO: 59, SEQ ID NO: 60, or SEQ ID NO: 64, SEQ ID NO: 65, SEQ ID NO: 66, or SEQ ID NO: 70, SEQ ID NO: 71, SEQ ID NO: 72, or SEQ ID NO: 76, SEQ ID NO: 77, SEQ ID NO: 78, or SEQ ID NO: 82, SEQ ID NO: 83, SEQ ID NO: 84 and or combinations thereof and wherein said isolated monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof are agonists of human and mouse EDAR.

CDR amino acid sequences of the obtained agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof that specifically bind human (mAbEDAR1-15) and mouse EDAR (mAbEDAR1-14) are shown in Table 1.

More preferably, the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof, comprise: a heavy chain variable region that comprises CDR1, CDR2, CDR3 sequences and a light chain variable region that comprises CDR1, CDR2, CDR3 sequences wherein:

(a) the heavy chain variable region CDR1 sequence comprises the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NOs: 1, 7, 13, 19, 25, 31, 37, 43, 49, 55, 61, 67, 73 or 79 and conservative modifications thereof;

(b) the heavy chain variable region CDR2 sequence comprises the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NOs: 2, 8, 14, 20, 26, 32, 38, 44, 50, 56, 62, 68, 74 or 80 and conservative modifications thereof;

(c) the heavy chain variable region CDR3 sequence comprises the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NOs: 3, 9, 15, 21, 27, 33, 39, 45, 51, 57, 63, 69, 75 or 81 and conservative modifications thereof;

(d) the light chain variable region CDR1 sequence comprises an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NOs: 4, 10, 16, 22, 28, 34, 40, 46, 52, 58, 64, 70, 76 or 82 and conservative modifications thereof;

(e) the light chain variable region CDR2 sequence comprises an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NOs: 5, 11, 17, 23, 29, 35, 41, 47, 53, 59, 65, 71, 77 or 83 and conservative modifications thereof;

(f) the light chain variable region CDR3 sequence comprises an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NOs: 6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, 60, 66, 72, 78 or 84 and conservative modifications thereof.

As used herein, the term “conservative sequence modifications” is intended to refer to amino acid modifications that do not significantly affect or alter the binding characteristics of the antibody containing the amino acid sequence. Such conservative modifications include amino acid substitutions, additions and deletions. Modifications can be introduced into an antibody of the invention by standard techniques known in the art, such as site-directed mutagenesis and PCR-mediated mutagenesis. Conservative amino acid substitutions are ones in which the amino acid residue is replaced with an amino acid residue having a similar side chain. Families of amino acid residues having similar side chains have been defined in the art. Conservative amino acid substitutions are herein defined as exchanges within one of the following five groups:

I. Small aliphatic, nonpolar or slightly polar residues: Ala, Ser, Thr, Pro, Gly

II. Polar, positively charged residues: His, Arg, Lys

III. Polar, negatively charged residues: and their amides: Asp, Asn, Glu, Gln

IV. Large, aromatic residues: Phe, Tyr, Trp

V. Large, aliphatic, nonpolar residues: Met, Leu, Ile, Val, Cys. (see, e.g., Creighton, Proteins (1984)).

According to certain embodiments, amino acid substitutions are those that: (1) reduce susceptibility to proteolysis, (2) reduce susceptibility to oxidation, (3) alter binding affinity for forming protein complexes, (4) alter binding affinities, and/or (5) confer or modify other physicochemical or functional properties on such polypeptides.

The isolated agonist anti EDAR monoclonal antibody according to the present invention is not limited to the whole molecule, and may be a fragment of the antibody or the modified product thereof, as long as it still binds to EDAR (or fragment or variant thereof) and has retained the capacity of being EDAR agonist.

Multivalent, preferably bivalent, antibody and a monovalent antibody are included Examples of the fragment of an antibody include Fab, F(ab)′2, Fv, Fab/c having one Fab and a complete Fc, and a single chain Fv (scFv) wherein the Fv of the H-chain or the L-chain is ligated with an appropriate linker. Specifically, an antibody fragment is synthesized by treating the antibody with an enzyme such as papain, pepsin or ficin, or genes encoding these antibody fragments are constructed, the genes are introduced into expression vectors, and the genes are then expressed by appropriate host cells (see e g, Rousseaux, J et al, Methods in Enzymology (1989) 121, 663-669, and Bird, R E et al, TIBTECH (1991) 9, 132-137).

scFv is obtained by linking the H-chain V-region and the L-chain V-region of antibodies. In the scFv, the H-chain V-region and the L-chain V-region are linked via a linker, or preferably a peptide linker (Huston, J. S. et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. (1988) 85, 5879-5883). The H-chain V-region and the L-chain V-region in scFv may be derived from any of those described as antibodies in this specification. As a peptide linker to link the V-regions, for example, any single-stranded peptide comprising 12 to 19 amino acid residues is used.

Most preferably, the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof, consist of:

(a) a heavy chain variable region CDR1 comprising SEQ ID NO: 1, 7, 13, 19, 25, 31, 37, 43, 49, 55, 61, 67, 73 or 79;

(b) a heavy chain variable region CDR2 comprising SEQ ID NO: 2, 8, 14, 20, 26, 32, 38, 44, 50, 56, 62, 68, 74 or 80;

(c) a heavy chain variable region CDR3 comprising SEQ ID NO: 3, 9, 15, 21, 27, 33, 39, 45, 51, 57, 63, 69, 75 or 81;

(d) a light chain variable region CDR1 comprising SEQ ID NO: 4, 10, 16, 22, 28, 34, 40, 46, 52, 58, 64, 70, 76 or 82;

(e) a light chain variable region CDR2 comprising SEQ ID NO: 5, 11, 17, 23, 29, 35, 41, 47, 53, 59, 65, 71, 77 or 83; and

(f) a light chain variable region CDR3 comprising SEQ ID NO: 6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, 60, 66, 72, 78 or 84.

According to an embodiment of the invention, the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof may present an antibody heavy chain selected among: IgG, IgM, IgA, IgE, single chain antibody and other immunoglobulin-derived constructs or non antibody binding proteins.

As used herein, “isotype” refers to the antibody class (e.g., IgM, IgA, IgE or IgG) that is encoded by heavy chain constant region genes.

Usually, the non antibody binding proteins comprise adnectins (fibronectin-based reagents), Affibody (protein A-based reagents), DARPins (ankyrin-based reagents), avimers (cysteine rich cell surface receptor proteins), anticalins (lipocalin-derived reagents), and nucleotide-based reagents and the like (see for example Nutall & Walsh 2008 Curr Op Pharmacol 8:609).

When the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof may present a IgG antibody heavy chain the latter may be selected among: IgG1, IgG2, IgG3 or IgG4, mutated IgG1 that is no longer recognized by FcR; mutated IgG4 sequence that no longer undergoes heavy chain swapping; mutated IgG to modify glycosylation; PEGylated IgG and the like. It is acknowledged that all possible “isotype switching” known to the person skilled in the art may be envisioned in the context of the present invention.

As used herein, “isotype switching” refers to the phenomenon by which the class, or isotype, of an antibody changes from one Ig class to one of the other Ig classes.

Among the list of antibody-based scaffolds, VNAR, which are lamprey-derived single domain antibodies may be advantageously used.

The present invention further provides isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof, comprising an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of:

(a) the amino acid sequences of variable region of the heavy chain shown in SEQ ID NO 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181 or 182 and the variable regions of the light chain shown in SEQ ID NO 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195 or 196.

(b) amino acid sequences that differ from those specified in (a) by one or more conservative amino acid substitutions;

(c) amino acid sequences having at least 95% sequence identity to the sequences specified in (a), or (b);

(d) biological active fragments of amino acid sequences specified in (a) or (b) or (c) being agonists of human and mouse EDAR; and

(e) biological active variants or modifications of amino acid sequences specified in (a) or (b) or (c) or (d) being agonists of human and mouse EDAR.

The term “sequence identity/similarity” has its ordinary meaning in the field. The terms “identical” or percent “identity” in the context of two or more polypeptide sequences, refer to two or more sequences that are the same, or have a specified percentage of amino acid residues that are the same (i.e., at least 70% identity, preferably at least 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, even more preferably at least 95% or 98% or even 99% identity over a specified region), when compared and aligned for maximum correspondence. Sequence identity can be measured in terms of percentage identity; the higher the percentage, the more identical the sequences are. Sequence similarity can be measured in terms of percentage similarity (which takes into account conservative amino acid substitutions); the higher the percentage, the more similar the sequences are. Homologs or orthologs of nucleic acid or amino acid sequences possess a relatively high degree of sequence identity/similarity when aligned using standard methods. This homology is more significant when the orthologous proteins or cDNAs are derived from species which are more closely related (e.g., human and mouse sequences), compared to species more distantly related (e.g., human and C. elegans sequences).

Methods of alignment of sequences for comparison are well known in the art. Various programs and alignment algorithms are described in: Smith & Waterman, Adv. Appl. Math. 2:482, 1981; Needleman & Wunsch, J. Mol. Biol. 48:443, 1970; Pearson & Lipman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85:2444, 1988; Higgins & Sharp, Gene, 73:23744, 1988; Higgins & Sharp, CABIOS 5:151-3, 1989; Corpet et al., Nuc. Acids Res. 16:10881-90, 1988; Huang et al. Computer Appls. in the Biosciences 8, 155-65, 1992; and Pearson et al., Meth. Mol. Bio. 24:307-31, 1994. Altschul et al., J. Mol. Biol. 215:403-10, 1990, presents a detailed consideration of sequence alignment methods and homology calculations. The NCBI Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) (Altschul et al., J. Mol. Biol. 215:403-10, 1990) is available from several sources, including the National Center for Biological Information (NCBI, National Library of Medicine, Building 38A, Room 8N805, Bethesda, Md. 20894) and on the Internet, for use in connection with the sequence analysis programs blastp, blastn, blastx, tblastn and tblastx. Additional information can be found at the NCBI web site. For comparisons of amino acid sequences of greater than about 30 amino acids, the Blast 2 sequences function is employed using the default BLOSUM62 matrix set to default parameters, (gap existence cost of 11, and a per residue gap cost of 1). When aligning short peptides (fewer than around 30 amino acids), the alignment should be performed using the Blast 2 sequences function, employing the PAM30 matrix set to default parameters (open gap 9, extension gap 1 penalties). Proteins with even greater similarity to the reference sequence will show increasing percentage identities when assessed by this method, such as at least 70%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 92%, 95%, 98%, 99% sequence identity. When less than the entire sequence is being compared for sequence identity, homologs will typically possess at least 75% sequence identity over short windows of 10-20 amino acids, and can possess sequence identities of at least 85%, 90%, 95% or 98% depending on their identity to the reference sequence. Methods for determining sequence identity over such short windows are described at the NCBI web site. Homologs of the disclosed agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies are typically characterized by possession of at least 70%, preferably of at least 95%, and more preferably of at least 98% sequence identity sequence identity counted over the full-length alignment with the disclosed amino acid sequences using the NCBI Blast 2.0, or using the manual alignment as described above. Proteins with even greater similarity to the agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibody sequences will show increasing percentage identities when assessed by this method, such as at least 75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95% or even 98% sequence identity. When less than the entire sequence is being compared for sequence identity, homologs will typically possess at least 75% sequence identity over short windows of 10-20 amino acids, and can possess sequence identities of at least 85%, 90%, 95% or even 98% depending on their similarity to the reference sequence. One of skill in the art will appreciate that these sequence identity ranges are provided for guidance only; it is possible that strongly significant homologs could be obtained that fall outside the ranges provided.

The present invention also includes variants of the agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies. The term “variants” or derivatives or equivalents of the agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibody sequences refer to polypeptides having amino acid sequences that differ to some extent from a native sequence polypeptide that is amino acid sequences that vary from the native sequence by conservative amino acid substitutions, whereby one or more amino acids are substituted by another with same characteristics and conformational roles. The amino acid sequence variants possess substitutions, deletions, and/or insertions at certain positions within the amino acid sequence of the native amino acid sequence. Typically, such variants possess at least 90%, preferably at least 95%, and very particularly preferably at least 98%, sequence identity with the native sequence. Variants which are particularly preferred in this connection are replacement variants which typically contain less than 10, preferably less than 5, and very particularly preferably less than 3, replacements as compared with the respective disclosed sequences.

In addition or alternative to modifications made within the framework or CDR regions, agonist anti EDAR monoclonal antibodies of the invention may be engineered to include modifications within the Fc region, typically to alter one or more functional properties of the antibody, such as serum half-life, complement fixation, Fc receptor binding, and/or antigen-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. Furthermore, an antibody of the invention may be chemically modified (e.g., one or more chemical moieties can be attached to the antibody) or be modified to alter its glycosylation, again to alter one or more functional properties of the antibody.

Glycosylation can be altered to, for example, increase the affinity of the antibody for antigen. Such carbohydrate modifications can be accomplished by, for example, altering one or more sites of glycosylation within the antibody sequence. For example, one or more amino acid substitutions can be made that result in elimination of one or more variable region framework glycosylation sites to thereby eliminate glycosylation at that site. Such a glycosylation may increase the affinity of the antibody for antigen. Such an approach is described in further detail in U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,714,350 and 6,350,861 by Co et al.

Additionally or alternatively, an antibody can be made that has an altered type of glycosylation, such as a hypofucosylated antibody having reduced amounts of fucosyl residues or an antibody having increased bisecting GlcNac structures. Such altered glycosylation patterns have been demonstrated to increase the ADCC ability of antibodies. Such carbohydrate modifications can be accomplished by, for example, expressing the antibody in a host cell with altered glycosylation machinery. Cells with altered glycosylation machinery have been described in the art and can be used as host cells in which to express agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies of the invention to thereby produce an antibody with altered glycosylation. Alternatively, the fucose residues of the antibody may be cleaved off using a fucosidase enzyme.

Another modification of the antibodies herein that is contemplated by the invention is pegylation. An antibody can be pegylated to, for example, increase the biological (e.g., serum) half life of the antibody. To pegylate an antibody, the antibody, or fragment thereof, typically is reacted with polyethylene glycol (PEG), such as a reactive ester or aldehyde derivative of PEG, under conditions in which one or more PEG groups become attached to the antibody or antibody fragment. Preferably, the pegylation is carried out via an acylation reaction or an alkylation reaction with a reactive PEG molecule (or an analogous reactive water-soluble polymer). As used herein, the term “polyethylene glycol” is intended to encompass any of the forms of PEG that have been used to derivatize other proteins, such as mono (Cl—ClO) alkoxy- or aryloxy-polyethylene glycol or polyethylene glycol-maleimide. In certain embodiments, the antibody to be pegylated is a glycosylated antibody. Methods for pegylating proteins are known in the art and can be applied to the antibodies of the invention. See for example, EP 0 154 316 by Nishimura et al. and EP 0 401 384 by Ishikawa et al.

In a particular embodiment, the agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies of the present invention do not contain asparagine isomerism sites. A deamidation or isoaspartic acid effect may occur on N-G or D-G sequences, respectively. The deamidation or isoaspartic acid effect results in the creation of isoaspartic acid which decreases the stability of an antibody by creating a kinked structure off a side chain carboxy terminus rather than the main chain.

In a preferred embodiment, antibodies are selected that do not rapidly degrade. Fragmentation of a monoclonal anti-EDAR antibody may be measured using capillary electrophoresis (CE) and MALDI-MS, as is well understood in the art (Alexander A J and Hughes D E (1995) Anal Chem 67:3626-32). In another preferred embodiment, antibodies are selected that have minimal aggregation effects. Aggregation may lead to triggering of an unwanted immune response and/or altered or unfavorable pharmacokinetic properties. Generally, antibodies are acceptable with aggregation of 25% or less, preferably 20% or less, even more preferably 15% or less, even more preferably 10% or less and even more preferably 5% or less. Aggregation may be measured by several techniques well known in the art, including size-exclusion column (SEC) high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and light scattering to identify monomers, dimers, trimers or multimers.

FIG. 5 shows the amino acid sequences of the variable regions of the light chains and heavy chains in respect of fourteen agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies, namely mAbEDAR1, mAbEDAR2, mAbEDAR3, mAbEDAR5, mAbEDAR6, mAbEDAR7, mAbEDAR8, mAbEDAR9, mAbEDAR10, mAbEDAR11, mAbEDAR12, mAbEDAR13, mAbEDAR14 and mAbEDAR15.

Some additional unanticipated results are in favor of the non obviousness nature of the present invention.

Following some preliminary results, Applicants observed that agonist anti-EDAR mAb of the invention were found 10- to more than 1000-fold less potent than Fc-EDA1 (see US Patent 2005/152,872; Gaide et al.) in the in vitro assay using EDAR-Fas-transduced Jurkat cells. Based on this low in vitro potency, at the time of their first in vivo evaluation, it was not anticipated to observe that the anti-EDAR mAb would be as active as Fc-EDA1. These results might be explained by the 10- to 20-times longer half-life of the antibodies than of the Fc-EDA1 fusion protein, or by the fact that the activation pathway in the in vitro system used by the Applicants, or in cells in vivo is different.

Apart from this, the naturally occurring soluble EDA1 likely is a multimer of trimers and Fc-EDA1 is a hexameric ligand. It was well documented that the simultaneous engagement and clustering of multiple Fas receptors is necessary for biological activity (Schneider et al, J. Exp. Med. 187:1205-13, 1998; Holler et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 23:1428-40, 2003) and strongly suspected that simultaneous engagement and clustering of multiple EDAR receptors was necessary for biological activity (Schneider et al., J. Biol. Chem. 276:18819-27, 2001; Swee et al, J. Biol. Chem. 284:27267-76, 2009). By contrast, anti-EDAR antibodies are only divalent. It was therefore not likely that this molecular format would be as biologically active as Fc-EDA1.

In addition, it was not expected that anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies that would have binding specificities other than the one of Fc-EDA1 (different binding sites on EDAR) would have agonist properties. Since there is no simple way of controlling antigen specificity of antibodies (unless using short antigen fragments covering the desired region of antigen specificity; with the risk of losing conformation determinants), Applicants results were totally surprising.

Finally, antibodies from some isotypes might exhibit toxicity activities (e.g. ADCC or antibody-dependent cytotoxicity, CDC or complement-dependent cytotoxicity and FcR-mediated activation of myeloid cells), which could have made the use of these antibodies not practical in vivo.

Another object of the invention is to provide an isolated nucleic acid molecule encoding the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof as defined above.

The term “nucleic acid molecule”, as used herein, is intended to include DNA molecules and RNA molecules. A nucleic acid molecule may be single-stranded or double-stranded, but preferably is double-stranded DNA.

In addition to the above described monoclonal antibodies, artificially altered gene recombinant antibodies such as chimeric antibodies or humanized antibodies can be used for, for example, lowering heteroantigenicity against a human. These altered antibodies can be produced using a known method.

Chimeric antibodies can e.g., be obtained by ligating the DNA encoding the antibody V-region to a DNA encoding a human antibody C-region, incorporating the product into an expression vector, and then introducing the vector into a host to cause the host to produce the antibodies. Using this known method, chimeric agonist anti EDAR monoclonal antibodies useful in the present invention can be obtained.

Humanized antibodies are also referred to as reshaped human antibodies, which are prepared by grafting an antibody CDR (complementarity determining region) of a mammal other than a human, such as a mouse, to the CDR of a human antibody. The general gene recombination technique thereof is also known (see European Patent Application Publication EP 125023 and WO 96/02576, or any one of their US counterparts, such as e g U.S. Pat. No. 6,068,040).

The term “humanized antibody” is intended to refer to antibodies in which CDR sequences derived from the germline of another mammalian species, such as a mouse, have been grafted onto human framework sequences. Additional framework region modifications may be made within the human framework sequences.

Chimeric or humanized antibodies of the present invention can be prepared based on the sequence of a non-human monoclonal antibody prepared as described above. DNA encoding the heavy and light chain immunoglobulins can be obtained from the non-human hybridoma of interest and engineered to contain non-murine (e.g., human) immunoglobulin sequences using standard molecular biology techniques. For example, to create a chimeric antibody, murine variable regions can be linked to human constant regions using methods known in the art (see e.g., U.S. Pat. No. 4,816,567 to Cabilly et al). To create a humanized monoclonal antibody, murine CDR regions can be inserted into a human framework using methods known in the art (see e.g., U.S. Pat. No. 5,225,539 to Winter, and U.S. Pat. Nos. 5,530,101; 5,585,089; 5,693,762 and 6,180,370 to Queen et al). In a preferred embodiment, the antibodies of the invention are human monoclonal antibodies.

CDR nucleotide sequences encoding for the obtained agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof that specifically bind human (mAbEDAR1-15) and mouse (mAbEDAR1-14) EDAR are shown in Table 2.

In addition, FIGS. 3 and 4 show the determination of the nucleotide sequences of the anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies mAbEDAR1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.

Another object of the invention concerns an expression vector comprising at least one copy of the nucleic acid molecule as described above.

The term “vector” as used herein, is intended to refer to a nucleic acid molecule capable of transporting another nucleic acid to which it has been linked. One type of vector is a “plasmid”, which refers to a circular double stranded DNA loop into which additional DNA segments may be ligated. Another type of vector is a viral vector, wherein additional DNA segments may be ligated into the viral genome. Certain vectors are capable of autonomous replication in a host cell into which they are introduced (e.g., bacterial vectors having a bacterial origin of replication and episomal mammalian vectors). Other vectors (e.g., non-episomal mammalian vectors) can be integrated into the genome of a host cell upon introduction into the host cell, and thereby are replicated along with the host genome. Moreover, certain vectors are capable of directing the expression of genes to which they are operatively linked. Such vectors are referred to herein as “recombinant expression vectors” (or simply, “expression vectors”).

In general, expression vectors of utility in recombinant DNA techniques are often in the form of plasmids. In the present specification, “plasmid” and “vector” may be used interchangeably as the plasmid is the most commonly used form of vector. However, the invention is intended to include such other forms of expression vectors, such as viral vectors (e.g. replication defective retroviruses, adenoviruses and adeno-associated viruses), which serve equivalent functions.

The invention also concerns host cells comprising the above described expression vector. The term “recombinant host cell” (or simply “host cell”), as used herein, is intended to refer to a cell into which a recombinant expression vector has been introduced. It should be understood that such terms are intended to refer not only to the particular subject cell but to the progeny of such a cell. Because certain modifications may occur in succeeding generations due to either mutation or environmental influences, such progeny may not, in fact, be identical to the parent cell, but are still included within the scope of the term “host cell” as used herein. Recombinant host cells include, for example, CHO cells and lymphocytic cells.

Expression vectors and host cells suitable for expression of recombinant antibodies and humanized antibodies in particular, are well known in the art. The following references are representative of methods and vectors suitable for expression of recombinant immunoglobulins which may be utilized in carrying out the present invention: Weidle et al., Gene, 51: 21-29 (1987); Dorai et al., J. Immunol., 13 (12): 4232-4241 (1987); De Waele et al., Eur. J. Biochem., 176: 287-295 (1988); Colcher et al., Cancer Res., 49: 1738-1745 (1989); Wood et al., J. Immunol., 145 (9): 3011-3016 (1990); Bulens et al., Eur. J. Biochem., 195: 235-242 (1991); Beldsington et al., Biol. Technology, 10: 169 (1992); King et al., Biochem. J., 281: 317-323 (1992); Page et al., Biol. Technology, 9: 64 (1991); King et al., Biochem. J., 290: 723-729 (1993); Chaudhary et al., Nature, 339: 394-397 (1989); Jones et al., Nature, 321: 522-525 (1986); Morrison and Oi, Adv. Immunol., 44: 65-92 (1989); Benhar et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 91: 12051-12055 (1994); Singer et al., J. hnunol., 150: 2844-2857 (1993); Couto et al., Hybridoma, 13 (3): 215-219 (1994); Queen et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 86:10029-10033 (1989); Caron et al., Cancer Res., 52: 6761-6767 (1992); Coloura et al, J. Immunol. Meth., 152: 89-109 (1992). Moreover, vectors suitable for expression of recombinant antibodies are commercially available. The vector may, e.g. be a bare nucleic acid segment, a carrier-associated nucleic acid segment, a nucleoprotein, a plasmid, a virus, a viroid, or a transposable element.

Host cells known to be capable of expressing functional immunoglobulins include, e.g.: mammalian cells such as Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells; COS cells; myeloma cells, such as NSO and SP2/0 cells; insect cells, bacteria such as Escherichia coli; yeast cells such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae; and other host cells. Of these, CHO cells are used by many researchers given their ability to effectively express and secrete immunoglobulins. NSO cells are one of the preferred types of host cells useful in the present invention.

Host cells are transformed following techniques that are known to the person skilled in the art. A “transformed” cell is a cell into which has been introduced a nucleic acid molecule by molecular biology techniques. As used herein, the term transformation encompasses all techniques by which a nucleic acid molecule might be introduced into such a cell, including transfection with viral vectors, transformation with plasmid vectors, and introduction of naked DNA by electroporation, lipofection, calcium phosphate precipitation, and particle gun acceleration.

In particular, the present invention also relates to a hybridoma secreting the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof according to the present invention.

The thus prepared hybridomas producing monoclonal antibodies can be passage-cultured in a standard culture solution, or can be stored for a long period in liquid nitrogen. One example of a method employed to obtain monoclonal antibodies from the hybridomas involves culturing the hybridomas and obtaining monoclonal antibodies in the culture supernatant according to a standard method. The former method is suitable for the mass production of antibodies.

A monoclonal antibody that can be used in the present invention can be a recombinant monoclonal antibody that is prepared by cloning the antibody gene from the hybridoma, incorporating the gene into an appropriate vector, introducing the vector into a host, and then causing the host to produce the recombinant monoclonal antibodies by genetic engineering techniques (e.g., see Vandamme, A. M. et al., Fur. J. Biochem, (1990) 192, 767-775, 1990).

In addition to the above host cell, a transgenic animal or plant can also be used to produce a recombinant antibody.

Thus a further object of the invention concerns a transgenic non-human animal having a genome comprising the isolated nucleic acid molecule and/or the expression vector according to the present invention.

In another aspect, the present invention concerns a pharmaceutically composition comprising the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof according to the present invention and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. According to the present invention, the pharmaceutically composition comprises at least a therapeutically effective quantity or amount of the substantially purified and isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof according to the present invention.

The isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof described herein as the “compound” may be administered with a physiologically acceptable carrier. A physiologically acceptable carrier is a formulation to which the compound can be added to dissolve it or otherwise facilitate its administration. An important factor in choosing an appropriate physiologically acceptable carrier is selecting a carrier in which the compound remains active or the combination of the carrier and the compound produces an active compound. Usually, the pharmaceutically acceptable carrier can be a solvent or dispersion medium. Examples of suitable aqueous and nonaqueous carriers which may be employed in the pharmaceutical composition of the invention include water, ethanol, polyols (such as glycerol, propylene glycol, polyethylene glycol, and the like), and suitable mixtures thereof, vegetable oils, such as olive oil, and injectable organic esters, such as ethyl oleate. Proper fluidity can be maintained, for example, by the use of emulsifying agents such as lecithin, by the maintenance of the required particle size in the case of dispersions, and by the use of surfactants, such as Tween 20.

The pharmaceutical composition may also contain adjuvants such as preservatives, wetting agents, emulsifying agents, pharmaceutically-acceptable antioxidants and dispersing agents. Prevention of presence of microorganisms may be ensured both by sterilization procedures, supra, and by the inclusion of various antibacterial and antifungal agents, for example, paraben, chlorobutanol, phenol sorbic acid, and the like. It may also be desirable to include isotonic agents, such as sugars, sodium chloride, and the like into the compositions. In addition, prolonged absorption of the injectable pharmaceutical form may be brought about by the inclusion of agents which delay absorption such as aluminum monostearate and gelatin.

Examples of pharmaceutically-acceptable antioxidants include: (1) water soluble antioxidants, such as ascorbic acid, cysteine hydrochloride, sodium bisulfate, sodium metabisulfite, sodium sulfite and the like; (2) oil-soluble antioxidants, such as ascorbyl palmitate, butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), lecithin, propyl gallate, alpha-tocopherol, and the like; and (3) metal chelating agents, such as citric acid, ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), sorbitol, tartaric acid, phosphoric acid, and the like.

Pharmaceutically acceptable salts of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof according to the present invention may also be envisioned.

A “pharmaceutically acceptable salt” refers to a salt that retains the desired biological activity of the parent compound and does not impart any undesired toxicological effects (see e.g., Berge, S. M., et al. (1977) J. Pharm. Sci. 66: 1-19).

In a preferred embodiment, the pharmaceutical composition of the invention is formulated for parenteral, intravenous, oral, subcutaneous, intradermal, intramuscular or topical, administration.

The phrases “parenteral administration” and “administered parenterally” as used herein means modes of administration other than enteral and topical administration, usually by injection, and includes, without limitation, intravenous, intramuscular, intraarterial, intrathecal, intracapsular, intraorbital, intracardiac, intradermal, intraperitoneal, transtracheal, subcutaneous, subcuticular, intraarticular, subcapsular, subarachnoid, intraspinal, epidural and intrasternal injection and infusion.

Preferred routes of administration for the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof according to the present invention are intravenously, intramuscularly and intraperitoneally. Preferred modes of delivery are by injection and infusion.

Injectable forms may include sterile aqueous solutions or dispersions. Furthermore, form of sterile powders may be prepared for the extemporaneous preparation of such sterile injectable solutions or dispersions. In all cases, the final injectable form must be sterile and must be effectively fluid for easy syringability. The pharmaceutical composition must be stable under the conditions of manufacture and storage; thus, preferably should be preserved against the contaminating action of microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi.

Parenteral administration may be prepared as solutions or suspensions of the combined components in physiological solution. A suitable surfactant can be included such as, for example, hydroxypropylcellulose. Dispersions can also be prepared in glycerol, liquid polyethylene glycols, and mixtures thereof in oils.

Further, a preservative can be included to prevent the detrimental growth of microorganisms.

In preparing oral dosage forms, any convenient pharmaceutical media may be employed. For example, water, glycols, oils, alcohols, flavoring agents, preservatives, coloring agents, and the like may be used to form oral liquid preparations such as suspensions, elixirs and solutions; while carriers such as starches, sugars, microcrystalline cellulose, diluents, granulating agents, lubricants, binders, disintegrating agents, and the like may be used to form oral solid preparations such as powders, capsules and tablets. Because of their ease of administration, tablets and capsules are the preferred oral dosage units whereby solid pharmaceutical carriers are employed. Optionally, tablets may be coated by standard aqueous or non-aqueous techniques.

A tablet may be prepared by compression or molding, optionally with one or more accessory ingredients or adjuvants.

Compressed tablets may be prepared by compressing, in a suitable machine, the combined components in a free-flowing form such as powder or granules, optionally mixed with a binder, lubricant, inert diluent, surface active or dispersing agent.

Molded tablets may be made by molding in a suitable machine, a mixture of the powdered compound moistened with an inert liquid diluent.

Effective dosage regimens are adjusted to provide the optimum desired response (e.g., a therapeutic response). For example, a single bolus may be administered, several divided doses may be administered over time or the dose may be proportionally reduced or increased as indicated by the exigencies of the therapeutic situation. It is especially advantageous to formulate parenteral compositions in dosage unit form for ease of administration and uniformity of dosage. Dosage unit form as used herein refers to physically discrete units suited as unitary dosages for the subjects to be treated; each unit contains a predetermined quantity of active compound calculated to produce the desired therapeutic effect in association with the required pharmaceutical carrier. The specification for the dosage unit forms of the invention are dictated by and directly dependent on (a) the unique characteristics of the active compound and the particular therapeutic effect to be achieved, and (b) the limitations inherent in the art of compounding such an active compound for the treatment of sensitivity in individuals.

Regardless of the route of administration selected, the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof according to the present invention, which may be used in a suitable hydrated form, and/or the pharmaceutical composition of the present invention, are formulated into pharmaceutically acceptable dosage forms by conventional methods known to those of skill in the art.

Actual dosage levels of the active ingredients in the pharmaceutical compositions of the present invention can be varied so as to obtain an amount of the active ingredient which is effective to achieve the desired therapeutic response for a particular patient, composition, and mode of administration, without being toxic to the patient. The selected dosage level depends upon a variety of pharmacokinetic factors including the activity of the particular compositions of the present invention employed, or the salt or amide thereof, the route of administration, the time of administration, the duration of the treatment, other drugs, compounds and/or materials used in combination with the particular compositions employed, the age, sex, weight, condition, general health and prior medical history of the patient being treated, and like factors.

A physician or veterinarian can start doses of the compounds of the invention-employed in the pharmaceutical composition at levels lower than that required to achieve the desired therapeutic effect and gradually increase the dosage until the desired effect is achieved. In general, a suitable daily dose of a composition of the invention is that amount of the compound which is the lowest dose effective to produce a therapeutic effect. Such an effective dose generally depends upon the factors described above. It is preferred that administration be intravenous, intramuscular, intraperitoneal, or subcutaneous, or administered proximal to the site of the target. If desired, the effective daily dose of a therapeutic composition can be administered as two; three, four, five, six or more sub-doses administered separately at appropriate intervals throughout the day, optionally, in unit dosage forms. While it is possible for the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof according to the present invention to be administered alone, it is preferable to administer the latter as a pharmaceutical formulation (composition).

Effective doses of the compositions of the present invention, for the treatment of immune-related conditions and diseases described herein vary depending upon many different factors, including means of administration, target site, physiological state of the patient, whether the patient is human or an animal, other medications administered, and whether treatment is prophylactic or therapeutic. Treatment dosages need to be titrated to optimize safety and efficacy.

For administration with an antibody, the dosage ranges from about 0.0001 to 100 mg/kg, and more usually 0.01 to 5 mg/kg, of the host body weight. For example dosages can be 1 mg/kg body weight or 10 mg/kg body weight or within the range of 1 to 10 mg/kg. An exemplary treatment regime entails administration once per every two weeks or once a month or once every 3 to 6 months. In some methods, two or more monoclonal antibodies with different binding specificities are administered simultaneously, in which case the dosage of each antibody administered falls within the ranges indicated. Antibody is usually administered on multiple occasions. Intervals between single dosages can be weekly, monthly or yearly. Intervals can also be irregular as indicated by measuring blood levels of antibody to EDAR in the patient. In some methods, dosage is adjusted to achieve a plasma antibody concentration of 0.001-1000 μg/ml. Alternatively, antibody can be administered as a sustained release formulation, in which case less frequent administration is required.

Dosage and frequency vary depending on the half-life of the antibody in the patient. In general, human antibodies show the longest half-life, followed by humanized antibodies, chimeric antibodies, and nonhuman antibodies. The dosage and frequency of administration can vary depending on whether the treatment is prophylactic or therapeutic. In prophylactic applications, a relatively low dosage is administered at relatively infrequent intervals over a long period of time. Some patients continue to receive treatment for the rest of their lives. In therapeutic applications, a relatively high dosage at relatively short intervals is sometimes required until progression of the disease is reduced or terminated, and preferably until the patient shows partial or complete amelioration of symptoms of disease. Thereafter, the patient can be administered a prophylactic regime.

The dosage ranges of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof according to the present invention may vary with the administration routes, as well as the state of the patient (age, sex, body weight, extent of the disease etc.). Ideally, the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof is administered to a patient in need thereof at a dosage unit from 0.1 mg/kg of body weight to 100 mg/kg of body weight.

It was unexpectedly found that the administration (for example application, injection, delivery, contact etc.) of the pharmaceutical composition according to the invention results in an improved therapeutic effect in particular in the treatment of X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED) or tooth agenesis.

It was demonstrated that the present invention has important implications for the design of novel treatment strategies of patients suffering in the development of cells or tissues of ectodermal origin. More specifically, the present invention has important implications for the design of novel treatment strategies of patients with XLHED or tooth agenesis.

The present invention also concerns the use of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention, for the preparation of a medicament for modulating the development of cells or tissues of ectodermal origin, such as hair, teeth, skin, sweat glands, sebaceous glands, larynx and trachea mucus-producing cells, Meibomian glands, preputial glands, mammary glands and salivary glands.

In the present invention, the term “modulating” refers to a molecule which is capable to interact with a specific receptor and to modify or control its activity.

The medicament according to the invention can be used for the treatment of diseases such as ectodermal dysplasia, or disturbances or anomalies of ectodermal structures that are not caused by mutations in EDA1, such as anomalies of the hair, of the teeth or of the glands, in particular for treating alopecia, sebaceous gland malfunction or a deficiency of sweat glands or sebaceous glands or for wound healing.

Preferably, the medicament of the invention can be used for the treatment of X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia or tooth agenesis.

In a first embodiment, the medicament may be administered to the mother/the mother animal during pregnancy. Injection of the medicament to the fetus, may be carried out either directly, following the same routes as identified above (parenterally, intravenously, orally, subcutaneously, intradermally, intramuscularly or topically) or alternatively through the umbilical vein.

In a second embodiment of the invention, the medicament may be administered to a pre-term newborn, a newborn, a child, a young adult or an adult. Considering the results reported in the study of Gaide and Schneider (Nature Medicine 2003), the assumption was that a few days after birth, Fc-EDA1 had no longer biological activity. It thus came as a surprise that administration of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention in adult Tabby mice and adult wild type mice would still be therapeutically active.

The half-lives of immunoglobulins are measured in days to weeks. Not surprisingly, the presence of monoclonal anti-EDAR antibody of the invention was still detectable in the serum one week following injection. The long in vivo half-life of the antibodies opens the possibility to expose patients such as adolescent and adult Tabby mice or humans to these therapeutic agents for extended periods of time. Therefore this long term treatment brings unexpected therapeutic benefit, even after the post-natal period.

Beside the use of monoclonal anti-EDAR antibodies as drug candidates for the treatment of XLHED and the like, these antibodies also constitute invaluable analytical tools. Most of these antibodies show cross-reactivity with mouse and human EDAR. Monoclonal anti-EDAR antibodies of the invention are also able to detect rat, rabbit and dog EDAR. These antibodies were successfully tested in flow cytometry and Western blotting applications. The use of these reagents in immunohistochemistry is of real importance as a diagnostic tool.

Alternatively, a further aspect of the present invention also concerns a method of treating XLHED in a patient in need thereof. According to the present invention, the method of treating XLHED comprises administering to the patient the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof in an amount which is therapeutically effective.

It is also another aspect of the invention to use the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention, for the manufacture of a medicament involved in the reconstitution of the skin.

Preferably, the reconstitution of the skin comprises burns, ulcers or scares such as bedsores, cosmetic reconstruction after surgery such as tumour ablation.

Another object of the invention is the use of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention, for the manufacture of a medicament for modifying hair morphology.

If it was reasonable to predict that the injection of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention would have similar effects to Fc-EDA1, it was not anticipated that these antibodies would so dramatically modify hair coloration (Gaide and Schneider, Nature Medicine 2003 says “The coat of treated animals was often darker in color, probably because of an increased number of hair-associated melanocytes”).

It was also not anticipated that the morphology (the structure) of the hairs would be modified by anti-EDAR antibodies. It was more believed that the number of hair follicles or their cycle would be altered.

Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the administration of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention in adult Tabby mice and adult wild type mice modified hair structure and color.

The invention also provides a method of increasing the development of one or more hair follicle, tooth, sweat gland, sebaceous glands, larynx and trachea mucus-producing cells, Meibomian glands, preputial glands, mammary glands and salivary glands in a tissue, comprising administering to a subject in need thereof, the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention.

Preferably this method comprises administering to said subject in need thereof an amount of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention, sufficient to promote the development of one or more hair follicle, tooth, sweat gland, sebaceous glands, larynx and trachea mucus-producing cells, Meibomian glands, preputial glands, mammary glands and salivary glands in a tissue of said subject in need thereof.

In particular, the subject is suffering from an ectodermal disease and preferably the ectodermal disease is XLHED, tooth agenesis or alopecia.

Additionally, the present invention pertains to a pharmaceutical kit comprising at least an effective amount of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention, together with instructions for use and in particular instructions directed to the treatment of XLHED.

The pharmaceutical kit according to the present invention may comprise a container comprising at least said isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof.

Generally, the Kit comprises a container and a label or package insert on or associated with the container. Suitable containers include, for example, bottles, vials, syringes, etc. The containers may be formed from a variety of materials such as glass or plastic. The container holds a composition which is effective for treating the condition and may have a sterile access port (for example the container may be an intravenous solution bag or a vial having a stopper pierceable by a hypodermic injection needle). The label or package insert indicates that the composition is used for treating the condition of choice, such as XLHED.

Alternatively, or additionally, the Kit may further comprise a second (or third) container comprising a pharmaceutically-acceptable buffer, such as bacteriostatic water for injection (BWFI), phosphate-buffered saline, Ringer's solution and dextrose solution. It may further include other materials desirable from a commercial and user standpoint, including other buffers, diluents, filters, needles, and syringes.

Agonist anti-EDAR antibodies that cross-react with mouse and human EDAR can also cross-react with EDAR of most mammalian species, and also with EDAR of other vertebrate species. If the agonist antibodies do not cross-react with EDAR of a given mammalian or vertebrate species, it is possible to generate them according to the process described in this application by immunizing EDAR-deficient mice with an EDAR antigen in which the EDAR sequence corresponds to that of the species of interest.

Finally, another object of the invention is the use of the isolated agonist anti-EDAR monoclonal antibodies or isolated monoclonal antibody fragments or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention, for the manufacture of a medicament for use in veterinary applications in any mammal or vertebrate species. The medicament can be utilized in utero (for mammals) or in ovo (for birds, reptiles, egg-layer fishes, etc. . . . ), or in young animals, or in adult animals. The treatment can be used to modulate the development of cells or tissues of ectodermal origin, such as hair, feathers, scales, horns, claws, beaks, teeth, skin, sweat glands, sebaceous glands, larynx and trachea mucus-producing cells, Meibomian glands, preputial glands, mammary glands and salivary glands. In particular, the treatment can be used to temporarily or permanently modify hair, scale or feathers color and/or morphology.

Given a specific variable domain region sequence, one of ordinary skill can easily screen for complementary variable domain region sequences using methods well known in the art. See, for example, Klimka et al., British Journal of Cancer (2000) 93: 252-260; Beboer et al., J. Mol. Biol. (2000) 296: 833-849; Radar et al., PNAS (1998) 95:8910-8915; Portolano et al, J. Immuno. (193) 150: 880-887; and Clarkson et al., Nature (1991) 352: 624-628, contents of all of which is herein incorporated by reference. For example, a heavy chain variable domain sequence comprising 1, 2, or 3 of the heavy chain CDR amino acid sequences described herein can be screened against a library of light chain variable domain sequences to obtain antibodies that bind human and/or mouse EDAR. Alternatively, a light chain variable domain sequence comprising 1, 2, or 3 of the light chain CDRs described herein can be screened against a library of heavy chain variable domain sequences to obtain antibodies that bind human and/or mouse EDAR. Without wishing to be bound by theory, this methodology can be used to humanize any known antibody. For example, a non-human variable domain sequence can be screened against human variable domain sequences and then the identified human variable domain sequences screened against a second set of human variable domain sequences.

Accordingly, in some embodiments, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof comprises a heavy chain variable region and a light chain variable region, the heavy chain variable region comprising the complementary determining region (CDR) amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NO: 1, SEQ ID NO: 2, and SEQ ID NO: 3; or SEQ ID NO: 7, SEQ ID NO: 8, and SEQ ID NO: 9; or SEQ ID NO: 13, SEQ ID NO: 14, and SEQ ID NO: 15; or SEQ ID NO: 19, SEQ ID NO: 20, and SEQ ID NO: 21; or SEQ ID NO: 25, SEQ ID NO: 26, and SEQ ID NO: 27; or SEQ ID NO: 31, SEQ ID NO: 32, and SEQ ID NO: 33; or SEQ ID NO: 37, SEQ ID NO: 38, and SEQ ID NO: 39; or SEQ ID NO: 43, SEQ ID NO: 44, and SEQ ID NO: 45; or SEQ ID NO: 49, SEQ ID NO: 50, and SEQ ID NO: 51; or SEQ ID NO: 55, SEQ ID NO: 56, and SEQ ID NO: 57; or SEQ ID NO: 61, SEQ ID NO: 62, and SEQ ID NO: 63; or SEQ ID NO: 67, SEQ ID NO: 68, and SEQ ID NO: 69; or SEQ ID NO: 73, SEQ ID NO: 74, and SEQ ID NO: 75; or SEQ ID NO: 79, SEQ ID NO: 80, and SEQ ID NO: 81.

In some embodiments, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof comprises a heavy chain variable region and a light chain variable region, the heavy chain variable region comprising an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of: (a) SEQ ID NO: 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181 and 182; (b) amino acid sequences that differ from those sequences specified in (a) by 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 or more conservative amino acid substitution; and (c) amino acid sequences having at least 95% sequence identity to the sequences specified in (a) or (b).

In some embodiments, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof comprises a light chain variable region and a heavy chain variable region, the light chain variable region comprising the complementary determining region (CDR) amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NO: 4, SEQ ID NO: 5, and SEQ ID NO: 6; or SEQ ID NO: 10, SEQ ID NO: 11, and SEQ ID NO: 12; or SEQ ID NO: 16, SEQ ID NO: 17, and SEQ ID NO: 18; or SEQ ID NO: 22, SEQ ID NO: 23, and SEQ ID NO: 24; or SEQ ID NO: 28, SEQ ID NO: 29, and SEQ ID NO: 30; or SEQ ID NO: 34, SEQ ID NO: 35, and SEQ ID NO: 36; or SEQ ID NO: 40, SEQ ID NO: 41, and SEQ ID NO: 42; or SEQ ID NO: 46, SEQ ID NO: 47, and SEQ ID NO: 48; or SEQ ID NO: 52, SEQ ID NO: 53, and SEQ ID NO: 54; or SEQ ID NO: 58, SEQ ID NO: 59, and SEQ ID NO: 60; or SEQ ID NO: 64, SEQ ID NO: 65, and SEQ ID NO: 66; or SEQ ID NO: 70, SEQ ID NO: 71, and SEQ ID NO: 72; or SEQ ID NO: 76, SEQ ID NO: 77, and SEQ ID NO: 78; or SEQ ID NO: 82, SEQ ID NO: 83, and SEQ ID NO: 84.

In some embodiments, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof comprises a light chain variable region and a heavy chain variable region, the light chain variable region comprising an amino acid sequence selected from the group consisting of: (a) SEQ ID NO 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195 and 196; (b) amino acid sequences that differ from those sequences specified in (a) by 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 or more conservative amino acid substitutions; and (c) amino acid sequences having at least 80%, 85%, 90%, or 95% sequence identity to the sequences specified in (a) or (b).

Generally, amino acid sequences having at least 80%, 85%, 90%, or 95% sequence identity to the variable domain region sequences will differ from the variable domain region sequence at substitutable positions. A “substitutable position” is a particular position of the variable domain region sequence that can be substituted by different amino acid(s) without significantly decreasing the binding activity of the antibody. A substitutable position may also be referred to as “variation tolerant position.” Substitutable positions of variable domain sequence are revealed by aligning the heavy chain or light chain variable domain sequences and determining which amino acid occurs at which position. A substitutable position of a variable domain sequence disclosed herein is identified by virtue of the fact that the identity of the amino acid at the substitutable position varies between the individual variable domain sequences of related antibodies, e.g., antibodies exemplified herein. Once identified, the amino acid at the substitutable position of an individual variable domain sequence can be substituted for a different amino acid without significantly decreasing the binding affinity of the antibody. Generally to obtain antibodies, antibodies fragments, or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof substitutable positions outside the CDRs are preferred. However, one, two, three, four, or five or more positions in the CDRs can also be used. Preferably when substitutable positions within CDRs are used no more than one, two, three, four or five such positions may be used as substitutable positions. U.S. Pat. App. Publ. No. 2006/0099204, contents of which is herein incorporated by reference, describes methods for identifying substitutable positions.

In some embodiments, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof comprises a heavy chain variable region and a light chain variable region, the heavy chain variable region comprising the complementary determining region (CDR) amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NO: 1, SEQ ID NO: 2, and SEQ ID NO: 3; or SEQ ID NO: 7, SEQ ID NO: 8, and SEQ ID NO: 9; or SEQ ID NO: 13, SEQ ID NO: 14, and SEQ ID NO: 15; or SEQ ID NO: 19, SEQ ID NO: 20, and SEQ ID NO: 21; or SEQ ID NO: 25, SEQ ID NO: 26, and SEQ ID NO: 27; or SEQ ID NO: 31, SEQ ID NO: 32, and SEQ ID NO: 33; or SEQ ID NO: 37, SEQ ID NO: 38, and SEQ ID NO: 39; or SEQ ID NO: 43, SEQ ID NO: 44, and SEQ ID NO: 45; or SEQ ID NO: 49, SEQ ID NO: 50, and SEQ ID NO: 51; or SEQ ID NO: 55, SEQ ID NO: 56, and SEQ ID NO: 57; or SEQ ID NO: 61, SEQ ID NO: 62, and SEQ ID NO: 63; or SEQ ID NO: 67, SEQ ID NO: 68, and SEQ ID NO: 69; or SEQ ID NO: 73, SEQ ID NO: 74, and SEQ ID NO: 75; or SEQ ID NO: 79, SEQ ID NO: 80, and SEQ ID NO: 81, and the light chain variable region comprising the complementary determining region (CDR) amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NO: 4, SEQ ID NO: 5, and SEQ ID NO: 6; or SEQ ID NO: 10, SEQ ID NO: 11, and SEQ ID NO: 12; or SEQ ID NO: 16, SEQ ID NO: 17, and SEQ ID NO: 18; or SEQ ID NO: 22, SEQ ID NO: 23, and SEQ ID NO: 24; or SEQ ID NO: 28, SEQ ID NO: 29, and SEQ ID NO: 30; or SEQ ID NO: 34, SEQ ID NO: 35, and SEQ ID NO: 36; or SEQ ID NO: 40, SEQ ID NO: 41, and SEQ ID NO: 42; or SEQ ID NO: 46, SEQ ID NO: 47, and SEQ ID NO: 48; or SEQ ID NO: 52, SEQ ID NO: 53, and SEQ ID NO: 54; or SEQ ID NO: 58, SEQ ID NO: 59, and SEQ ID NO: 60; or SEQ ID NO: 64, SEQ ID NO: 65, and SEQ ID NO: 66; or SEQ ID NO: 70, SEQ ID NO: 71, and SEQ ID NO: 72; or SEQ ID NO: 76, SEQ ID NO: 77, and SEQ ID NO: 78; or SEQ ID NO: 82, SEQ ID NO: 83, and SEQ ID NO: 84.

As disclosed herein, the inventors have identified the novel antigenic portion of the human and mouse EDAR to which the antibodies described herein bind. Thus, the antibodies, antibody fragments, or antigen binding portions or fragments thereof described herein that bind to human and/or mouse EDAR sequence fragments corresponding to amino acids 29-114 of SEQ ID NO. 235 (identified as SEQ ID NO: 239 SNCGENEY YNQTTGLCQECPPCGPGEEPYLSCGYGTKDEDYGCVPCPAEKFSKGGYQICRR HKDCEGFFRATVLTPGDMENDAECG) and SEQ ID NO. 236 (identified as SEQ ID NO: 242, SNCGENEYHNQTTGLCQQCPPCRPGEEPYMSCGYGTKDDDYGCVP CPAEKFSKGGYQICRRHKDCEGFFRATVLTPGDMENDAECG) but do not significantly bind to the EDAR sequence fragments corresponding to amino acids 29-72 of SEQ ID NO: 235 (identified as SEQ ID NO. 237, SNCGENEYYNQTT GLCQECPPCGP GEEPYLSCGYGTKDEDYGCV) and/or amino acids 29-72 of SEQ ID NO: 236 (identified as SEQ ID NO: 240, SNCGENEYHNQTTGLCQQCPPCRPGEEPYMSCGYG TKDDDYGCV) are also subject of the invention disclosed herein. As used herein, the term “does not significantly bind” indicates that the affinity constant of the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof for binding to SEQ ID NO: 239 and/or SEQ ID NO: 242 is more than 10−7M, 10−6M, 10−5M, 10−4M, 10−3M, 10−2M, 10−1M, or 1M. In some further embodiments of this, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment therefore does not significantly bind to the EDAR sequence fragments corresponding to amino acids 71-114 of SEQ ID NO: 235 (identified as SEQ ID NO. 238, VPCPAEKFSKGGYQICRRHKDCEGFFRATVLTPGDMENDA ECG) and/or amino acids 71-114 of SEQ ID NO: 236 (identified as SEQ ID NO. 241, VPCPAEKFSKGGYQICRRHKDCEGFFRATVLTPGD MENDAECG).

In some embodiments, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragments thereof bind to human and/or mouse EDAR bind to human and/or mouse EDAR sequence fragments corresponding to SEQ ID NO: 2441 and/or SEQ ID NO: 243, but do not significantly bind to the EDAR sequence fragment SEQ ID NO: 239 in absence of SEQ ID NO. 238 and/or do not bind to the EDAR sequence fragment SEQ ID NO. 242 in the absence of SEQ ID NO 241.

In some embodiments, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment binds to the same antigenic determinant as does: (a) an antibody comprising a heavy chain variable region comprising the complementary determining region amino acid sequences of: SEQ ID NO: 1, SEQ ID NO: 2, and SEQ ID NO: 3; or SEQ ID NO: 7, SEQ ID NO: 8, and SEQ ID NO: 9; or SEQ ID NO: 13, SEQ ID NO: 14, and SEQ ID NO: 15; or SEQ ID NO: 19, SEQ ID NO: 20, and SEQ ID NO: 21; or SEQ ID NO: 25, SEQ ID NO: 26, and SEQ ID NO: 27; or SEQ ID NO: 31, SEQ ID NO: 32, and SEQ ID NO: 33; or SEQ ID NO: 37, SEQ ID NO: 38, and SEQ ID NO: 39; or SEQ ID NO: 43, SEQ ID NO: 44, and SEQ ID NO: 45; or SEQ ID NO: 49, SEQ ID NO: 50, and SEQ ID NO: 51; or SEQ ID NO: 55, SEQ ID NO: 56, and SEQ ID NO: 57; or SEQ ID NO: 61, SEQ ID NO: 62, and SEQ ID NO: 63; or SEQ ID NO: 67, SEQ ID NO: 68, and SEQ ID NO: 69; or SEQ ID NO: 73, SEQ ID NO: 74, and SEQ ID NO: 75; or SEQ ID NO: 79, SEQ ID NO: 80, and SEQ ID NO: 81; and/or (b) an antibody comprising a light chain variable region comprising the complementary determining region amino acid sequences of: SEQ ID NO: 4, SEQ ID NO: 5, and SEQ ID NO: 6; or SEQ ID NO: 10, SEQ ID NO: 11, and SEQ ID NO: 12; or SEQ ID NO: 16, SEQ ID NO: 17, and SEQ ID NO: 18; or SEQ ID NO: 22, SEQ ID NO: 23, and SEQ ID NO: 24; or SEQ ID NO: 28, SEQ ID NO: 29, and SEQ ID NO: 30; or SEQ ID NO: 34, SEQ ID NO: 35, and SEQ ID NO: 36; or SEQ ID NO: 40, SEQ ID NO: 41, and SEQ ID NO: 42; or SEQ ID NO: 46, SEQ ID NO: 47, and SEQ ID NO: 48; or SEQ ID NO: 52, SEQ ID NO: 53, and SEQ ID NO: 54; or SEQ ID NO: 58, SEQ ID NO: 59, and SEQ ID NO: 60; or SEQ ID NO: 64, SEQ ID NO: 65, and SEQ ID NO: 66; or SEQ ID NO: 70, SEQ ID NO: 71, and SEQ ID NO: 72; or SEQ ID NO: 76, SEQ ID NO: 77, and SEQ ID NO: 78; or SEQ ID NO: 82, SEQ ID NO: 83, and SEQ ID NO: 84, and wherein the isolated antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof competes with the antibody of (a) or (b) for binding at that antigenic determinant.

According to the invention, the isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof, wherein the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is an agonist of human and/or mouse EDAR. Preferably, said antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof binds to human and/or mouse EDAR with an affinity constant (KD) of at least 10−8M.

According to an embodiment of the invention, said antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is a humanized antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof.

In a preferred embodiment of the invention said antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is a monovalent. According to another embodiment of the invention, said antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is multivalent.

In some embodiments, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is a single chain antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof.

According to one embodiment, said antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is a Fab, F(ab)′2, Fv, Fab/c, Fv, single chain Fv (scFv), or Fd fragment.

According to another embodiment, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is a chimeric antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof.

Yet according to another embodiment of the invention, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is a fusion protein.

In some embodiment, the heavy chain of the isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof of the invention is selected from the group consisting of heavy chain of IgG, IgM, IgA, IgE, single chain antibody, immunoglobulin-derived constructs, and non antibody binding proteins. Preferably, the IgG is selected from the group consisting of IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4, mutated IgG1 that is no longer recognized by FcR, and mutated IgG4 that no longer undergoes heavy chain swapping.

According to another embodiment, the non antibody binding protein of the isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is selected from the group consisting of adnectins, Affibody, DARPins, avimers, anticalins, and nucleotide based reagents.

As used herein, the term “antigenic determinant” refers to that portion of an antigen that makes contact with a particular antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof (i.e., an epitope). When a protein or fragment of a protein is used to immunize a host animal, numerous regions of the protein may induce the production of antibodies which bind specifically to a given region or three dimensional structure on the protein; these regions or structures are referred to as antigenic determinants. An antigenic determinant may compete with the intact antigen (i.e., the immunogen used to elicit the immune response) for binding to an antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof.

As used herein, the phrase “competes for binding at that antigenic determinant” refers to the ability of an antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof to increase the affinity constant, for binding to same antigenic determinant, of a second antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof by at least 5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%. 90%, 100%, 1.1 fold, 1.25 fold, 1.5 fold, 5 fold, 10, fold, 50 fold, 100 fold or more in a competition binding assay. One of ordinary skill is well aware of methods for determining binding constants. One method for measuring binding constants is the commercially available Biacore assay apparatus as described in Example 1. In some embodiments, the binding affinity of an antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is higher than 10−7M, 10−6M, 10−5M, 10−4M, 10−3M, 10−2M, 10−1M, or 1M in the presence of the competing antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof.

Chimeric antibodies are antibodies whose light and heavy chain genes have been constructed, typically by genetic engineering, from antibody variable and constant region genes belonging to different species. For example the variable region of the genes from a mouse monoclonal antibody may be joined to human constant regions, such as gamma 1, gamma 2, gamma 3 and gamma 4.

The term “fusion protein” as used herein refers to a polypeptide which comprises protein domains from at least two different proteins. For example, a fusion protein may comprise an antigen-binding portion or fragment of an antibody and a non-antibody protein.

In one embodiment of the invention, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is conjugated to a ligand and/or a tag.

In one example, the heavy chain of said antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion thereof is conjugated to the ligand and/or tag.

In another example, the light chain of said antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is conjugated to the ligand and/or tag.

Conjugation of Antibodies with Ligand/Tags

A wide variety of ligands or tags can be coupled (i.e. linked) with the antibodies described herein. Without wishing to be bound by theory, the antibodies of the invention can be conjugated to either other peptides or other molecules to tailor, for example, the bioavailability, serum half-life or shelf-life of the antibodies, immunogenicity, tolerance by human body, or to affect the solubility of the antibodies in pharmaceutically acceptable carriers. Although, conjugation with ligands and tags is discussed in reference to antibodies herein, it is to be understood that antibody fragments and antigen binding portions and fragments are also amenable to conjugation with ligands and tags. In some embodiments, ligands include naturally occurring molecules, in some embodiments recombinant or synthetic molecules. Exemplary ligands include, but are not limited to, polylysine (PLL), poly L-aspartic acid, poly L-glutamic acid, styrene-maleic acid anhydride copolymer, poly(L-lactide-co-glycolied) copolymer, divinyl ether-maleic anhydride copolymer, N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide copolymer (HMPA), polyethylene glycol (PEG, e.g., PEG-2K, PEG-5K, PEG-10K, PEG-12K, PEG-15K, PEG-20K, PEG-40K), MPEG, [MPEG]2, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyurethane, poly(2-ethylacryllic acid), N-isopropylacrylamide polymers, polyphosphazine, polyethylenimine, cationic groups, spermine, spermidine, polyamine, pseudopeptide-polyamine, peptidomimetic polyamine, dendrimer polyamine, arginine, amidine, protamine, cationic lipid, cationic porphyrin, quaternary salt of a polyamine, thyrotropin, melanotropin, lectin, glycoprotein, surfactant protein A, mucin, glycosylated polyaminoacids, transferrin, bisphosphonate, polyglutamate, polyaspartate, aptamer, asialofetuin, hyaluronan, procollagen, immunoglobulins (e.g., antibodies), insulin, transferrin, albumin, sugar-albumin conjugates, intercalating agents (e.g., acridines), cross-linkers (e.g. psoralen, mitomycin C), porphyrins (e.g., TPPC4, texaphyrin, Sapphyrin), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (e.g., phenazine, dihydrophenazine), artificial endonucleases (e.g., EDTA), lipophilic molecules (e.g, steroids, bile acids, cholesterol, cholic acid, adamantane acetic acid, 1-pyrene butyric acid, dihydrotestosterone, 1,3-Bis-O(hexadecyl)glycerol, geranyloxyhexyl group, hexadecylglycerol, borneol, menthol, 1,3-propanediol, heptadecyl group, palmitic acid, myristic acid, O3-(oleoyl)lithocholic acid, O3-(oleoyl)cholenic acid, dimethoxytrityl, or phenoxazine), peptides (e.g., an alpha helical peptide, amphipathic peptide, RGD peptide, cell permeation peptide, endosomolytic/fusogenic peptide), alkylating agents, phosphate, amino, mercapto, polyamino, alkyl, substituted alkyl, radiolabeled markers, enzymes, haptens (e.g. biotin), transport/absorption facilitators (e.g., naproxen, aspirin, vitamin E, folic acid), synthetic ribonucleases (e.g., imidazole, bisimidazole, histamine, imidazole clusters, acridine-imidazole conjugates, Eu3+ complexes of tetraazamacrocycles), dinitrophenyl, HRP, AP, antibodies, hormones and hormone receptors, lectins, carbohydrates, multivalent carbohydrates, vitamins (e.g., vitamin A, vitamin E, vitamin K, vitamin B, e.g., folic acid, B12, riboflavin, biotin and pyridoxal), vitamin cofactors, lipopolysaccharide, an activator of p38 MAP kinase, an activator of NF-κB, taxon, vincristine, vinblastine, cytochalasin, nocodazole, japlakinolide, latrunculin A, phalloidin, swinholide A, indanocine, myoservin, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), interleukin-1 beta, gamma interferon, natural or recombinant low density lipoprotein (LDL), natural or recombinant high-density lipoprotein (HDL), bovine serum albumin (BSA), ovalbumin, keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH), and a cell-permeation agent (e.g., a helical cell-permeation agent).

Ligands can be used for any number of reasons including, but no limited to, targeting, PK modulation, and labeling/tagging. A targeting ligand can provide enhanced affinity for a selected target, e.g., a cell, cell type, tissue, organ, region of the body, or a compartment, e.g., a cellular, tissue or organ compartment. A PK modulating ligand can modulate pharmacokinetics of an antibody in vivo.

In some embodiments, the antibody of the invention is conjugated with a label/tag, such as a fluorescent label or a biotin label. Without wishing to be bound by theory, such labeling allows one to easily track the antibody, if necessary or to assist in purification of the antibody.

One can also design the ligand in such a way that is can be removed after purification of the antibody is complete. For example, the ligand can be attached to the antibody via a linker that can be is easily cleavable under the appropriate conditions. Such conditions can include acid or basic pH, heating, sonication, enzymatic cleavage, and the like.

As used herein, the term “label” refers to a composition capable of producing a detectable signal indicative of the presence of a target. Suitable labels include fluorescent molecules, radioisotopes, nucleotide chromophores, enzymes, substrates, chemiluminescent moieties, magnetic particles, bioluminescent moieties, and the like. As such, a label is any composition detectable by spectroscopic, photochemical, biochemical, immunochemical, electrical, optical or chemical means needed for the methods and devices described herein. For example, the antibody can be labeled with a detectable tag which can then be detected using an antibody specific to the label.

Exemplary fluorescent labels include, but are not limited to, Hydroxycoumarin, Succinimidyl ester, Aminocoumarin, Succinimidyl ester, Methoxycoumarin, Succinimidyl ester, Cascade Blue, Hydrazide, Pacific Blue, Maleimide, Pacific Orange, Lucifer yellow, NBD, NBD-X, R-Phycoerythrin (PE), a PE-Cy5 conjugate (Cychrome, R670, Tri-Color, Quantum Red), a PE-Cy7 conjugate, Red 613, PE-Texas Red, PerCP, Peridinin chlorphyll protein, TruRed (PerCP-Cy5.5 conjugate), Fluor X, Fluoresceinisothyocyanate (FITC), BODIPY-FL, TRITC, X-Rhodamine (XRITC), Lissamine Rhodamine B, Texas Red, Allophycocyanin (APC), an APC-Cy7 conjugate, Alexa Fluor 350, Alexa Fluor 405, Alexa Fluor 430, Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 500, Alexa Fluor 514, Alexa Fluor 532, Alexa Fluor 546, Alexa Fluor 555, Alexa Fluor 568, Alexa Fluor 594, Alexa Fluor 610, Alexa Fluor 633, Alexa Fluor 647, Alexa Fluor 660, Alexa Fluor 680, Alexa Fluor 700, Alexa Fluor 750, Alexa Fluor 790, Cy2, Cy3, Cy3B, Cy3.5, Cy5, Cy5.5 or Cy7.

The ligands can be conjugated, either directly or through a linker, to the N-terminal, C-terminal, or the amino acid side chains of the heavy and/or light chain of the antibody. A ligand can be present on an amino acid when said amino acid is incorporated into the antibody heavy and/or light during synthesis. In some embodiments, the ligand can be incorporated via coupling to a “precursor” amino acid after said “precursor” amino acid has been incorporated into the antibody heavy and/or light chain. For example, a ligand having an electrophilic group, e.g., a pentafluorophenyl ester or aldehyde group, can be conjugated to the N-terminal of heavy and/or light chain of the antibody.

In another example, a monomer having a chemical group suitable for taking part in Click Chemistry reaction can be incorporated, e.g., an azide or alkyne group. In a subsequent operation, i.e., after incorporation of the precursor monomer antibody heavy and/or light chain, a ligand having complementary chemical group, e.g., an alkyne or azide can be attached to the precursor monomer by coupling the alkyne and the azide together.

In some embodiments, the covalent linkages between the antibody and a ligand is mediated by a linker. This linker can be cleavable linker or non-cleavable linker, depending on the application. As used herein, a “cleavable linker” refers to linkers that are capable of cleavage under various conditions. Conditions suitable for cleavage can include, but are not limited to, pH, UV irradiation, enzymatic activity, temperature, hydrolysis, elimination and substitution reactions, redox reactions, and thermodynamic properties of the linkage. In some embodiments, a cleavable linker can be used to release the antibody after transport to the desired target. The intended nature of the conjugation or coupling interaction, or the desired biological effect, will determine the choice of linker group.

As used herein, the term “non-peptide linker” means an organic moiety that connects two parts of the peptide and such a moiety is not a peptide. Linkers typically comprise a direct bond or an atom such as oxygen or sulfur, a unit such as NR1, C(O), C(O)NH, SO, SO2, SO2NH or a chain of atoms, such as substituted or unsubstituted alkyl, substituted or unsubstituted alkenyl, substituted or unsubstituted alkynyl, arylalkyl, arylalkenyl, arylalkynyl, heteroarylalkyl, heteroarylalkenyl, heteroarylalkynyl, heterocyclylalkyl, heterocyclylalkenyl, heterocyclylalkynyl, aryl, heteroaryl, heterocyclyl, cycloalkyl, cycloalkenyl, alkylarylalkyl, alkylarylalkenyl, alkylarylalkynyl, alkenylarylalkyl, alkenylarylalkenyl, alkenylarylalkynyl, alkynylarylalkyl, alkynylarylalkenyl, alkynylarylalkynyl, alkylheteroarylalkyl, alkylheteroarylalkenyl, alkylheteroarylalkynyl, alkenylheteroarylalkyl, alkenylheteroarylalkenyl, alkenylheteroarylalkynyl, alkynylheteroarylalkyl, alkynylheteroarylalkenyl, alkynylheteroarylalkynyl, alkylheterocyclylalkyl, alkylheterocyclylalkenyl, alkylhererocyclylalkynyl, alkenylheterocyclylalkyl, alkenylheterocyclylalkenyl, alkenylheterocyclylalkynyl, alkynylheterocyclylalkyl, alkynylheterocyclylalkenyl, alkynylheterocyclylalkynyl, alkylaryl, alkenylaryl, alkynylaryl, alkylheteroaryl, alkenylheteroaryl, alkynylhereroaryl, where one or more methylenes can be interrupted or terminated by O, S, S(O), SO2, N(R1)2, C(O), cleavable linking group, substituted or unsubstituted aryl, substituted or unsubstituted heteroaryl, substituted or unsubstituted heterocyclic; where R1 is hydrogen, acyl, aliphatic or substituted aliphatic. The two parts of the compound can be linked together by providing on each part of the molecule complementary chemical functionalities that undergo a coupling reaction.

In some embodiments, linkers can be non-covalent coupling of two parts of a compound or two different molecules. Such non-covalent coupling can be achieved through, for example, ionic interactions, H-bonding, van der Waals interactions and affinity of one molecule for another. When non-covalent coupling is used, each part of the compound can be conjugated with a moiety that has complementary to another moiety that is conjugated to the second part of the compound. One example of such complementary coupling is the biotin/avidin coupling. Other examples include affinity of an oligonucleotide for its complementary strand, receptor/ligand binding, aptamer/ligand binding and antibody/antigen binding

Many strategies are known in the art for conjugating peptides to peptides and other molecules. For example, Hermanson, G. T., Bioconjugate Techniques, 2nd Ed., Academic Press (2008) and Niemeyr, C. M., Bioconjugation Protocols: Strategies and Methods (Methods in Molecular Biology), Humana Press (2004) provide a number of methods and techniques for conjugating peptides to other molecules. Contents of both of these are herein incorporated by reference in their entirety for all purposes. For a review of site-specific introduction of non-natural amino acids into peptides for conjugation see A. J. de Graaf, et al., Biocojugate Chemistry (2009) 20(7):1281-1295, contents of which are herein incorporated in its entirety. Int. Pat. App. Pub. No.: WO92/13095, contents of which are herein incorporated in its entirety, describes methods for PEGylation of peptides.

One conjugation strategy is the biotin-sandwich method (Davis, et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103:8155-8160 (2006)) in which a peptide is biotinylated and bound to biotinylated ligand using tetravalent streptavidin as a linker. To accomplish this, the peptide may be coupled to the 15 amino acid sequence of an acceptor peptide for biotinylation (referred to as AP; Chen, et al., Nat. Methods 2:99-104 (2005)). The fusion proteins can be made by incorporating the extra sequences at the N- or the C-terminus of the peptide. The acceptor peptide sequence allows site-specific biotinylation by the E. coli enzyme biotin ligase (BirA; Chen, et al., Nat. Methods 2:99-104 (2005)). A ligand peptide can be similarly biotinylated for conjugation with a peptide described herein. Many commercial kits are available for biotinylating proteins. Non-peptidyl ligands agents can also be conjugated with biotin using methods well known in the art for conjugating biotin to non-peptide molecules, e.g. small organic molecules. In order to prevent steric interference between the biotin/avidin groups and the peptides or the ligands, a spacer may be included between them.

The linkers and linking methods described herein can also be used for linking together heavy chain and light chain of an antibody, two or more Fv domains, and fragments thereof.

For simplicity, chemical moieties are defined and referred to throughout can be univalent chemical moieties (e.g., alkyl, aryl, etc.) or multivalent moieties under the appropriate structural circumstances clear to those skilled in the art.

The term “alkyl” refers to saturated non-aromatic hydrocarbon chains that may be a straight chain or branched chain, containing the indicated number of carbon atoms (these include without limitation methyl, ethyl, propyl, allyl, or propargyl), which may be optionally inserted with N, O, S, SS, SO2, C(O), C(O)O, OC(O), C(O)N or NC(O). For example, C1-C6 indicates that the group may have from 1 to 6 (inclusive) carbon atoms in it.

The term “alkenyl” refers to an alkyl that comprises at least one double bond. Exemplary alkenyl groups include, but are not limited to, for example, ethenyl, propenyl, butenyl, 1-methyl-2-buten-1-yl and the like.

The term “aryl” refers to monocyclic, bicyclic, or tricyclic aromatic ring system wherein 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 atoms of each ring may be substituted by a substituent. Exemplary aryl groups include, but are not limited to, phenyl, naphthyl, anthracenyl, azulenyl, fluorenyl, indanyl, indenyl, naphthyl, phenyl, tetrahydronaphthyl, and the like.

The term “heteroaryl” refers to an aromatic 5-8 membered monocyclic, 8-12 membered bicyclic, or 11-14 membered tricyclic ring system having 1-3 heteroatoms if monocyclic, 1-6 heteroatoms if bicyclic, or 1-9 heteroatoms if tricyclic, said heteroatoms selected from O, N, or S (e.g., carbon atoms and 1-3, 1-6, or 1-9 heteroatoms of N, O, or S if monocyclic, bicyclic, or tricyclic, respectively), wherein 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 atoms of each ring may be substituted by a substituent. Exemplary heteroaryl groups include, but are not limited to, pyridyl, furyl or furanyl, imidazolyl, benzimidazolyl, pyrimidinyl, thiophenyl or thienyl, pyridazinyl, pyrazinyl, quinolinyl, indolyl, thiazolyl, naphthyridinyl, and the like.

The term “cyclyl”, “cyclic” or “cycloalkyl” refers to saturated and partially unsaturated cyclic hydrocarbon groups having 3 to 12 carbons, for example, 3 to 8 carbons, and, for example, 3 to 6 carbons, wherein the cycloalkyl group additionally may be optionally substituted. Exemplary cycloalkyl groups include, but are not limited to, cyclopropyl, cyclobutyl, cyclopentyl, cyclopentenyl, cyclohexyl, cyclohexenyl, cycloheptyl, cyclooctyl, and the like.

The term “heterocyclyl”, “heterocycle” or “heterocyclic” refers to a nonaromatic 5-8 membered monocyclic, 8-12 membered bicyclic, or 11-14 membered tricyclic ring system having 1-3 heteroatoms if monocyclic, 1-6 heteroatoms if bicyclic, or 1-9 heteroatoms if tricyclic, said heteroatoms selected from O, N, or S (e.g., carbon atoms and 1-3, 1-6, or 1-9 heteroatoms of N, O, or S if monocyclic, bicyclic, or tricyclic, respectively), wherein 0, 1, 2 or 3 atoms of each ring may be substituted by a substituent. Exemplary heterocyclyl groups include, but are not limited to piperazinyl, pyrrolidinyl, dioxanyl, morpholinyl, tetrahydrofuranyl, and the like.

The term “optionally substituted” means that the specified group or moiety, such as an alkyl, aryl group, heteroaryl group and the like, is unsubstituted or is substituted with one or more (typically 1-4 substituents) independently selected from the group of substituents listed below in the definition for “substituents” or otherwise specified.

The term “substituents” refers to a group “substituted” on an alkyl, alkenyl, alkynyl, cycloalkyl, aryl, heterocyclyl, heteroaryl, acyl, amino group at any atom of that group. Suitable substituents include, without limitation, halo, hydroxy, oxo, nitro, haloalkyl, alkyl, alkenyl, alkynyl, alkaryl, aryl, aralkyl, alkoxy, aryloxy, amino, acylamino, alkylcarbanoyl, arylcarbanoyl, aminoalkyl, alkoxycarbonyl, carboxy, hydroxyalkyl, alkylthio, CF3, N-morphilino, phenylthio, alkanesulfonyl, arenesulfonyl, alkanesulfonamido, arenesulfonamido, aralkylsulfonamido, alkylcarbonyl, acyloxy, cyano or ureido. In some embodiments, substituent can itself be optionally substituted. In some cases, two substituents, together with the carbons to which they are attached to can form a ring.

The term “halo” refers to any radical of fluorine, chlorine, bromine or iodine.

The term “acyl” refers to an alkylcarbonyl, cycloalkylcarbonyl, arylcarbonyl, heterocyclylcarbonyl, or heteroarylcarbonyl substituent, any of which may be further substituted by substituents. Exemplary acyl groups include, but are not limited to, (C1-C6)alkanoyl (e.g., formyl, acetyl, propionyl, butyryl, valeryl, caproyl, t-butylacetyl, etc.), (C3-C6)cycloalkylcarbonyl (e.g., cyclopropylcarbonyl, cyclobutylcarbonyl, cyclopentylcarbonyl, cyclohexylcarbonyl, etc.), heterocyclic carbonyl (e.g., pyrrolidinylcarbonyl, pyrrolid-2-one-5-carbonyl, piperidinylcarbonyl, piperazinylcarbonyl, tetrahydrofuranylcarbonyl, etc.), aroyl (e.g., benzoyl) and heteroaroyl (e.g., thiophenyl-2-carbonyl, thiophenyl-3-carbonyl, furanyl-2-carbonyl, furanyl-3-carbonyl, 1H-pyrroyl-2-carbonyl, 1H-pyrroyl-3-carbonyl, benzo[b]thiophenyl-2-carbonyl, etc.). In addition, the alkyl, cycloalkyl, heterocycle, aryl and heteroaryl portion of the acyl group may be any one of the groups described in the respective definitions.

The term “alkoxy” refers to an —O-alkyl radical.

The term “aminoalkyl” refers to an alkyl substituted with an amino.

The term “mercapto” refers to an —SH radical.

The term “thioalkoxy” refers to an —S-alkyl radical.

The term “haloalkyl” refers to an alkyl group having one, two, three or more halogen atoms attached thereto. Exemplary haloalkyl groups include, but are not limited to chloromethyl, bromoethyl, trifluoromethyl, and the like.

According to another object of the invention, the antibody, antibody fragment, or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is obtained by the method of the invention.

Another object of the invention is to provide an isolated nucleic acid molecule encoding isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof as disclosed above.

It is also an object of the invention to provide an expression vector comprising at least one copy of the nucleic acid molecule of the invention.

A host cell comprising said expression vector and transgenic non-human animal having a genome comprising the isolated nucleic acid molecule of the invention and/or the expression vector as described above are also encompassed by the present invention.

The invention further provides for a hybridoma secreting isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof according to the invention.

Another object of the invention is a pharmaceutical composition comprising the isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof, and a pharmaceutically acceptable carrier. Preferably, the isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof is administered to a patient in need thereof at a dosage unit from 0.1 mg/kg of body weight to 100 mg/kg of body weight.

The pharmaceutical composition of the invention is suitable in treating X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED) or tooth agenesis.

In one embodiment of the invention, the pharmaceutical composition of the invention is formulated for parenteral, intravenous, oral, subcutaneous, intradermal, intramuscular or topical, administration.

Also encompassed is the use of isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention, for the preparation of a medicament for modulating the development of cells or tissues of ectodermal origin, such as hair, teeth, skin, sweat glands, sebaceous glands, larynx and trachea mucus-producing cells, Meibomian glands, preputial glands, mammary glands and salivary glands.

Preferably said medicament is used for the treatment of ectodermal dysplasia, or disturbances or anomalies of ectodermal structures that are not caused by mutations in EDA1, such as anomalies of the hair, of the teeth or of the glands, in particular for treating alopecia, sebaceous gland malfunction or a deficiency of sweat glands or sebaceous glands or for wound healing.

More preferably, the medicament is used for the treatment of X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia or tooth agenesis.

In one embodiment, the medicament is administered to the mother/the mother animal during pregnancy.

In particular, the medicament is administered to a subject in need thereof. According to some cases, the subject in need thereof is a fetus, a pre-term newborn, a newborn, a child, a young adult or an adult.

Another object of the invention is the use of the isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention, for the manufacture of a medicament involved in the reconstitution of the skin. In accordance with the invention, the reconstitution of the skin may comprise burns, ulcers or scares such as bedsores, cosmetic reconstruction after surgery such as tumour ablation.

Yet another object of the invention is the use of the isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention, for the manufacture of a medicament for modifying hair morphology.

The present invention also provides for a method of increasing the development of one or more hair follicle, tooth, sweat gland, sebaceous glands, larynx and trachea mucus-producing cells, Meibomian glands, preputial glands, mammary glands and salivary glands in a tissue, comprising administering to a subject in need thereof, the isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention. Preferably said method comprises administering to said subject in need thereof an amount of the isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof or the pharmaceutical composition of the invention sufficient to promote the development of one or more hair follicle, tooth, sweat gland, sebaceous glands, larynx and trachea mucus-producing cells, Meibomian glands, preputial glands, mammary glands and salivary glands in a tissue of said subject in need thereof. Preferably, the subject in need thereof is suffering from an ectodermal disease. In particular, said ectodermal disease is XLHED or alopecia or tooth agenesis.

Furthermore, the invention also concerns a pharmaceutical kit comprising at least an effective amount of the isolated monoclonal antibody or isolated monoclonal antibody fragment or antigen binding portion or fragment thereof or the pharmaceutical composition according to the invention, together with instructions for use.

Those skilled in the art will appreciate that the invention described herein is susceptible to variations and modifications other than those specifically described. It is to be understood that the invention includes all such variations and modifications without departing from the spirit or essential characteristics thereof. The invention also includes all of the steps, features, compositions and compounds referred to or indicated in this specification, individually or collectively, and any and all combinations or any two or more of said steps or features. The present disclosure is therefore to be considered as in all aspects illustrated and not restrictive, the scope of the invention being indicated by the appended Claims, and all changes which come within the meaning and range of equivalency are intended to be embraced therein.

Various references are cited throughout this Specification, each of which is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety.

The foregoing description will be more fully understood with reference to the following Examples. Such Examples, are, however, exemplary of methods of practicing the present invention and are not intended to limit the scope of the invention.

## EXAMPLES

### Example 1

**Preparation of Soluble EDAR**

Development of the EDAR-Fc expression vector. The EDAR-Fc gene construct was cloned into the PCR3 mammalian expression vector (Invitrogen) according to standard molecular biology techniques. Development of the vector for expression of EDAR-Fc has been described previously (Holler, N., Tardivel, A., Kovacsovics-Bankowski, M., Hertig, S., Gaide, O., Martinon, F., Tinel, A., Deperthes, D., Calderara, S., Schulthess, T., Engel, J., Schneider, P., and Tschopp, J. 2003 Mol Cell Biol 23, 1428-1440; Bossen, C., Ingold, K., Tardivel, A., Bodmer, J. L., Gaide, O., Hertig, S., Ambrose, C., Tschopp, J., and Schneider, P. 2006 J Biol Chem 281, 13964-13971; Schneider, P. 2000 Meth. Enzymol. 322, 322-345; Holler, N., Kataoka, T., Bodmer, J. L., Romero, P., Romero, J., Deperthes, D., Engel, J., Tschopp, J., and Schneider, P. 2000 J Immunol Methods 237, 159-173).

Development of stably expressing EDAR-Fc 293 cells. EDAR-Fc was produced in stably expressing EDAR-Fc 293 cells. For the generation of these cells, human embryonic kidney 293 cells (ATCC CRL 1573) were diluted twice weekly in DMEM and nutrient mix F12 media mixed in a 1 to 1 ratio (Life Technologies) supplemented with 2% FCS and antibiotics (293 medium). Two days before transfection, 5×105 confluent 293 cells were resuspended in 4 ml of 293 medium. These cells were seeded in a 25 cm2 cell culture flask (Nunc). Ten μg of expression plasmid sterilized by ethanol precipitation were redissolved in 250 μl of sterile 250 mM CaCl2. Once cells were adherent, they were washed once with PBS then 4 ml of DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS and antibiotics were added. Two hundred and fifty μl of 2×HeBS were added to the plasmid solution while vortexing gently. After 1 to 3 minutes, the solution was added to the cells and left overnight. The cells were then washed once with PBS and 4 ml of 293 medium were added and left for 1 to 3 days. The cells were subsequently resuspended and diluted 1 to 8 in 4 ml of selection medium (50 ml of 293 medium supplemented with 400 μl of a 100 mg/ml aqueous solution of G418, Life Technologies). After 4 to 7 days, the cells were diluted 1 to 8 in 4 ml of selection medium. When cells reached confluency after 4 to 7 days, they were resuspended and 10 μl of cell suspension were seeded in 8 ml of selection medium in a 9 cm diameter cell culture plate. After 10 to 15 days, when clones were macroscopically visible with bare eyes, they were picked and transferred in wells of flat bottom 96 well plates (Costar, Cambridge, Mass.) containing 200 μl of selection medium. After 7 to 10 d, and thereafter every 3 to 4 d, the clones were diluted 1 to 10 in selection medium. After 14 d, when medium in the initial wells had turned yellow, the presence of recombinant EDAR-Fc was assessed by Western blotting under non reducing conditions. For the detection of unreduced EDAR-Fc fusion protein, a 0.5 μg/ml solution of protein A-peroxidase (Sigma, St-Louis, Mo.) was used and revealed with ECL reagent (GE Healthcare). The selected clones were amplified by successive transfer from 96 well plates into 25 cm2, 75 cm2, 175 cm2 cell culture flasks and, finally, 2 liter roller bottles (Falcon, Lincoln Park, N.Y.). After 14 d in roller bottles, the culture supernatant was cleared from cells by centrifugation (3000×g) and filtered using a 0.45 μm filter (Nalgene, Rochester, Ill.). The supernatant was supplemented with 0.02% NaN3 and stored at 4° C. or −20° C. until purification.

Purification of EDAR-Fc recombinant fusion protein. A one step purification procedure of EDAR-Fc chimeric protein was performed using HiTrap Protein A columns (GE Healthcare). Briefly, the column was equilibrated in PBS, loaded with 1 liter of supernatant at a flow rate of 4 ml/min, washed with 10 ml PBS and eluted with 4 ml of 0.1 M citrate-NaOH, pH 2.5. The eluate was neutralized with 1 ml of 1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, concentrated in a Centricon-30 device down to less than 0.5 ml and washed twice with 2 ml of PBS to exchange buffer. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA reagent (Pierce, Rockford, Ill.) and bovine serum albumin as a standard. The purification yield was comprised between 0.5 and 5 mg of EDAR-Fc per liter. The purified EDAR-Fc protein was finally sterilized by 0.2 μm filtration using Millex-GV low protein binding filters (Millipore, Bedford, Mass.) and aliquots were stored at −20° C. Purity was checked by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie Blue staining.

**Immunization of EDAR-Deficient Mice**

Soluble EDAR-Fc (150 μg) in PBS (500 μl) was mixed to 500 μl of STIMUNE (Cedi-diagnostics, Lelystad, The Netherlands), briefly sonicated three times and kept at 4° C. until used. Female OVEB1 mice (Headon et al., Nature Genetics 22:370-4, 1999) were injected subcutaneously on the back with 150 μl of antigen preparation and intramuscularly in the tail with 100 μl of antigen preparation. Ten to fourteen days later, mice were intramuscularly injected with 100 μl of antigen in each back leg and subcutaneously with 150 μl of antigen subcutaneously in the back. Twenty-eight to thirty-two days after the first immunization, the mice were bled and serial dilutions of serum were tested by ELISA for the presence of anti-EDAR antibodies (see protocol below). On day forty to forty-five after the first antigen injection, mice found positive by ELISA were injected in the back and the back legs with 150 μg of antigen in PBS. Three days later, the cells from the lymph nodes were fused with myeloma cells.

**Detection of Anti-EDAR Antibodies in the Serum of EDAR-Immunized Mice**

The presence of anti-EDAR antibodies in the serum of EDAR-immunized mice was determined by ELISA. Briefly, ELISA plates (96 wells Maxisorp Immunoplate, Nunc) were coated for 2 h at 37° C. or overnight at room temperature with 100 μl of 1 μg/ml EDAR-Fc in PBS. The wells were blocked with 300 μl of blocking buffer (5% FCS in PBS) and incubated for 1 h at 37° C. The wells were then washed 3× with wash buffer (PBS+0.05% Tween 20) and 100 μl of serum diluted in incubation buffer (0.5 FCS in PBS) were added to each well. After an incubation of 1 h at 37° C., the wells were washed 3× with wash buffer. Bound antibodies were revealed by the addition of 100 μl of peroxydase-labeled goat anti-mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch) diluted 1 in 1000 in incubation buffer for 30 min at 37° C., followed by three repetitive washes with wash buffer and addition of 100 μl of o-phenylenediamine (OPD) reagent (Sigma). When developed, the reaction was stopped with 50 μl of 2 N HCl and the absorbance was measured at 490 nm.

**Generation of Hybridoma Cells**

Lymph nodes were homogenized in a sterile glass homogenizer in 10 ml of RPMI 1640 with 6 to 8 strokes using a borosilicated pestle. The suspension was transferred in a 50 mL Falcon tube and cells spin down at 300 g for 10 minutes at room temperature. Cells were resuspended in 10 mL RPMI 1640 medium and lymph node cells were counted. Ten to 20×107 lymph node cells and 10 to 20×106 myeloma cells (P3-X63Ag8 or NS1) were mixed at a 10 to 1 ratio for the fusion, and the cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 300×g for 10 min. Pre-warmed PEG 1500 (0.5 ml) was added to the pellet drop-wise along the tube wall, and the tube was kept for 3 minutes at 37° C. while shaking gently every minute. Five ml of RPMI 1640 medium (pre-warmed at 37° C.) were added along the tube wall over a period of 10 minutes (0.5 ml/min), followed by a 1 minute incubation at 37° C. Five ml of RPMI 1640 medium were added again over a period of 5 to 6 minutes. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 300×g for 10 minutes and at room temperature, re-suspended in 6 ml of complete RPMI 1640 medium, and incubated for 1 hour at 37° C. in a CO2 incubator. The cell fusion suspension was laid gently (100 μl/well) over mouse macrophages (feeder layer) contained in 6 96 flat bottom well plates. Twenty four hours after the fusion, HAT (hypoxanthine, aminopterine and thymidine)-containing selection medium (RPMI 1640) was added to the cells. The supernatants of the 96 well plates were tested by ELISA for antibody secretion. Confluent, positive clones by ELISA were amplified by transferring the cells into 24 well plates containing a macrophage feeding layer plus 1×HAT medium. Positive clones underwent two rounds of sub-cloning by limiting dilution, and screened by ELISA for antibody secretion. The final sub-clones were slowly adapted to medium without macrophages and HAT supplement.

**ELISA-Based Identification of Anti-EDAR Antibodies**

The presence of anti-EDAR antibodies in the supernatants of hybridoma cultures was determined by ELISA. Briefly, microplates were coated overnight at 4° C. with 1 μg/ml of EDAR-Fc or with the indicated control antigens in PBS. Plates were blocked for 1 hour at room temperature with PBS, 0.05% Tween 20 and 1% BSA. Hybridoma supernatants diluted in PBS and 0.1% BSA were incubated for 4 hours at room temperature. Detection of bound antibodies was performed using horseradish peroxydase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG antibodies (Jackson Immunoresearch). Tetramethylbenzidine (Sigma) was used as substrate. Two washes with PBS and 0.05% Tween 20 were performed between each step.

**Production and Purification of Monoclonal Antibodies**

Hybridoma cells were amplified in complete RPMI 1640 medium, washed twice in sterile PBS and resuspended at 100′000 cells/ml in Opti MEM I serum free medium (Gibco BRL, Life Technology, Basel, Switzerland). T175 flasks or roller bottles were inoculated with 100 ml and 800 ml of cell cultures, respectively. Cells were grown for 10 to 14 days. Culture supernatant was filtered and stored at 4° C. or −20° C. with sodium azide. Alternatively, hybridoma cells were slowly adapted to Opti MEM I medium and cultured directly in this medium. Supernatants were loaded onto HighTrap protein-G columns (GE Healthcare), washed with PBS and eluted in 0.1 M of sodium citrate, pH 2.7. Eluted fractions were neutralized with 1 M Tris, pH 9. Fractions were concentrated and buffer exchanged for PBS using microconcentrators (Millipore),

**Production of Fab Fragments of Monoclonal Antibodies (FIG. 32)**

Monoclonal antibodies (0.5 to 5 mg of each) were digested with immobilized ficin for 72 h at 37° C. under the conditions recommended by the provider (Pierce, Rockford, Ill. Product number 44881). Fab fragments were recovered in the flow through of a Protein A affinity column, concentrated to 250 μl using a microconcentrator, and loaded onto a Superdex-200 gel filtration column (GE Healthcare) eluted at 0.5 ml/ml in PBS. Fractions of 0.5 ml were collected. Peak fractions containing the Fab fragment were pooled, and the Fab was used for the determination of the affinity constant.

**Determination of Binding and Dissociation Constants of Anti-EDAR Fab Fragments (FIG. 33)**

Measurements were performed on a Biacore T100 apparatus equipped with the Biacore T100 Control Software. Anti-human IgG Fc antibodies were immobilized on CM5 chips. hEDAR-Fc at 2 μg/ml was then loaded on the chip for 60 sec at 2 μl/min. Fab fragments at various concentrations (100, 25, 6.25, 1.6, 0.4 and 0 nM) were applied for 90 sec at 50 μl/min and then washed for 900 sec with buffer. Chips were regenerated for 30 sec with 3 M MgCl2 at 10 μl/min. Experimental curves were fitted with a 1:1 interaction model used to determine the rate of association (ka), the rate of dissociation (kd) and the equilibrium dissociation constant (KD=kd/ka), also known as the affinity of the Fab.

**Generation of EDAR-Fas-Expressing Jurkat Cells**

Retroviruses were produced essentially as described previously (Soneoka, Y., Cannon, P. M., Ramsdale, E. E., Griffiths, J. C., Romano, G., Kingsman, S. M., and Kingsman, A. J. 1995 Nucleic Acids Res 23, 628-633). Briefly, 293T cells were transiently transfected with pMSCVpuro-hEDAR-Fas or pMSCVpuro-mEDAR-Fas and co-transfected with the pHIT60 and VSV-G plasmids, containing the sequences for gag-pol and VSV-G, respectively. pMSCVpuro-EDAR-Fas encoded the extracellular domain of human EDAR (amino acids 1-183) or mouse EDAR (amino acids 1-183), amino acids VD and the transmembrane and intracellular domains of human Fas (amino acids 169-335). After transfection, 293T cells were incubated for 24 h in RPMI supplemented with 10% FCS. Fas-deficient Jurkat-JOM2 cells were a kind gift of Olivier Micheau (University of Dijon, France). Jurkat-JOM2 cells (106 cells in 1 ml) were mixed with virus-containing supernatants (3 ml) supplemented with 8 μg/ml of polybrene, left for 15 min at 37° C., and centrifuged for 1 h at 37° C. and at 450×g. Cells were selected with 5 μg/ml of puromycin and cloned. About 40 clones were tested for their sensitivity to Fc-EDA1, and one of the sensitive clones (Jurkat-2199 clone 23 for hEDAR-Fas, Jurkat-2260 clone 7 for mEDAR) was selected for further experimental work.

**Anti-EDAR Antibody-Induced Apoptosis of EDAR-Fas-Expressing Jurkat Cells (FIGS. 12, 13)**

The cytotoxicity assay using EDAR-Fas Jurkat cells was performed as described for FasL on Jurkat cells (Schneider, P., Holler, N., Bodmer, J. L., Hahne, M., Frei, K., Fontana, A., and Tschopp, J. 1998 J Exp Med 187, 1205-1213).

**In Vivo Identification of Agonist Anti-EDAR Antibodies (FIG. 14)**

Tabby mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbour) were handled according to institutional and Swiss Federal Veterinary Office guidelines, with the authorization of the Office Vétérinaire Cantonal du Canton de Vaud.

Pups were labeled by puncture of a footpad with a 30 Gauge needle dipped in Aramis tattoo ink (Braintree Scientific, Braintree, Mass.). Intraperitoneal injections of antibodies were performed within 24 h after birth with a maximal volume of 20 μl of hybridoma supernatant using 0.5 ml U-100 Insulin syringe (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, N.J.). Examination and photography of tail hairs were performed 3 to 4 weeks post injection. Six weeks later, the presence of hair on the tail was scored on a scale of 4 units (0: no hair and 4: hair density similar to that on the tail of wild type mice), and the presence of sweat glands on the footpads was determined using the starch and iodine assay (Gaide, O., and Schneider, P. 2003 Nat Med 9, 614-618).

### Example 2

**Binding of mAbEDAR1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 Monoclonal Antibodies to Both Human and Mouse EDAR (FIGS. 6, 9)**

Immunization of mice with human antigens usually gives rise to antibodies that do not cross-react with the mouse homologous proteins. In order to obtain antibodies recognizing both human and mouse EDAR, a feature which would considerably facilitate pre-clinical development of drug candidates, EDAR-deficient mice were immunized with human EDAR. It was then assessed whether monoclonal antibodies generated from these mice indeed recognized EDAR from these two animal species. The wells of microtiter plates were coated with soluble human and mouse EDAR-Fc fusion protein and a negative control protein (human Fas-Fc), blocked and probed with serial dilutions of anti-EDAR monoclonal antibody (mAb) mAbEDAR1, 2, 3 and 4 and a negative control mAb (Aprily 5) (FIG. 6), or with a single dose of mAbEDAR1 to 15 (FIG. 9). The presence of bound antibodies was revealed by the addition of peroxydase-labeled goat anti-mouse IgG antibodies, followed by ortho-phenylenediamine (OPD) and measure of the absorbance at 490 nm. It was found that mAbEDAR1 to 14 recognized human and mouse EDAR, whereas mAbEDAR15 recognized human but not mouse EDAR. None of the fifteen anti-EDAR antibodies recognized control proteins (Fas-Fc, or human Fc fused to an irrelevant portion of EDAR), and the control mAb Aprily 5 did not bind either to mouse and human EDAR. Altogether, these results indicated that fourteen anti-EDAR mAb were specific for both human and mouse EDAR, and one recognized human EDAR only.

The capacity of these mAb to recognize the human EDAR and its mouse counterpart constitutes an important feature for further clinical development, as it makes pharmacological studies in animals possible.

### Example 3

**Mapping of the Region on EDAR Recognized by the Anti-EDAR mAb (FIGS. 9, 10 and 11)**

EDAR is a transmembrane protein whose extracellular part is composed of three membrane distal cystein-rich domains (CRDs) and of a proximal membrane stalk domain (FIG. 9A). Constructs coding for the entire EDAR protein, domains I and II, domains II and III, domain III and the stalk domain, domains I, II and III alone and the stalk domain alone were assembled with the Fc region of human IgG1, inserted into a mammalian expression vector and transiently transfected in 293T cells. Culture supernatants were captured in an ELISA plate with an anti-human IgG antibody, and revealed using the anti-EDAR mAb mAbEDAR1 to 15 and a horseradish peroxydase-coupled anti-human IgG mAb to monitor that the various EDAR-Fc truncation mutants had been efficiently captured. mAbEDAR1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10 and 11 recognize the fragment made up of domains I and II. The other fragments were not recognized, in particular the fragments made up of either domain I or II alone. mAbEDAR5, 6, 12 and 13 specifically recognized domain I, alone or together with domain II. mAbEDAR9, 14 and 15 only recognized Fc constructs containing the entire EDAR extracellular domain. Similar conclusions were obtained for mAbEDAR1 to 6 using a Western blot and for mAbEDAR1 to 4 with a FACS-based assay.

### Example 4

**Lack of Competition Between APO200 and Anti-EDAR mAb for Binding to EDAR (FIG. 8)**

It was evaluated whether Fc-EDA1 and the anti-EDAR mAb have overlapping binding sites on EDAR. Wells of microtiter plates were coated with EDAR-Fc, blocked and incubated with serial dilutions of mAbEDAR1, 2, 3 or 4 or Aprily5 or Fc-EDA1 (competitors). Thereafter, a constant amount of biotinlyated mAbEDAR1, 2, 3 or 4 or Flag-EDA1 were added in each well (revelators). The presence of bound revelators was revealed with peroxydase labeled streptavidin (for biotinylated mAbEDAR1, 2, 3 and 4) or biotinylated anti-Flag M2 antibody followed by peroxydase-labeled streptavidin (for Flag-EDA1). It was found that the addition of Fc-EDA1 prevented the binding of Flag-EDA1, but did not prevent binding of the biotinylated anti-EDAR mAb to EDAR-Fc, indicating that the anti-EDAR mAb and APO200 have non-overlapping binding sites. Conversely, the addition of anti-EDAR antibodies (especially mAbEDAR1) prevented the binding of biotinylated anti-EDAR antibodies, but did not prevent the binding of Flag-EDA1. These results indicate that anti-EDAR mAb can be endowed with agonist activity even though their binding sites on EDAR are distinct from the one of APO200.

### Example 5

**Polyclonal Anti-EDAR Antibodies without Agonist Activity (FIG. 13)**

In order to assess whether anti-EDAR antibodies are usually endowed with agonist properties, it was tested whether polyclonal anti-mouse EDAR antibodies raised in the goat were capable of inducing apoptosis of EDAR-Fas-transduced Jurkat cells. Incubation of these cells with serial dilutions of goat anti-EDAR antibodies did not result in any significant cell death. Even the addition of anti-goat IgG cross-linking antibodies failed to confer killing activity to these anti-EDAR polyclonal antibodies. By contrast, APO200 induced apoptosis with an ED50 between 1 and 10 ng/ml (ED50: efficacy dose 50, the dose of agonist inducing half-maximal cell death). In addition, these goat anti-EDAR antibodies were successfully used to stain human and mouse EDAR-transfected cells. These results indicated that these antibodies indeed bound to EDAR. Together, these findings indicated that only a subset of the anti-EDAR antibodies has agonist properties.

### Example 6

**Half-Life of the Anti-EDAR Monoclonal Antibodies Following Injection in Mice (FIG. 16)**

The pharmacokinetics of a protein largely controls its therapeutic activity. It was previously determined that Fc-EDA1 has a half-life of 7 to 9 hours in the mouse. It is likely that EDAR agonists with more extended half-lives might prove more therapeutically effective. The in vivo half-life of the anti-EDAR mAb mAbEDAR1 and 3 was therefore established. Wild type mice were intravenously injected with mAbEDAR1 or mAbEDAR3 (200 μl of 1 mg/ml). Serum samples were collected after 20 minutes and 1, 2, 8, 16 and 32 days. The concentration of the anti-EDAR mAb was then determined by ELISA. Briefly, serial dilutions of serum were incubated in wells coated with human EDAR-Fc at 1 μg/ml, followed by anti-mouse IgG coupled to horseradish peroxydase and ortho-phenylenediamine as substrate. The half-lives of the anti-EDAR mAb were calculated by plotting for each time point the serum dilution giving an absorbance of 1 at 490 nm. An exponential curve was then fitted on the series of points. The time point 20 minutes was not included, as this time point corresponded to the distribution phase of the antibodies. Half-lives of 11 days were determined for mAbEDAR1 and mAbEDAR3. The extended half-lives of the anti-EDAR mAb, as compared with Fc-EDA1, contribute to the therapeutic activity of these molecules.

### Example 7

**Therapeutic Dose of the Anti-EDAR mAb in Newborn Tabby Mice (FIG. 15)**

In order to evaluate the capacity of the anti-EDAR mAb to revert the Tabby phenotype, one day-old Tabby mice were intraperitoneally injected with graded doses of protein G-affinity chromatographed anti-EDAR mAb mAbEDAR1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14 (1 to 5 mice per group). Three to six weeks later, hair density on the tail was blindly scored on a scale of 4. Scores of 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 corresponded to the absence of hair, sparse hair on the ventral side, dense hair on the ventral side, dense hair on both sides and a hair density similar to wild type mice, respectively. In some cases, the presence of functional sweat glands in footpads was evidenced by the starch-iodine assay, and scored on a scale of 2. Scores of 0, 1 and 2 corresponded to no sweat glands, few sweat glands (typically between 1 and 4) and several sweat glands (more than 4), respectively. It was found that the dose producing half-maximal effects in newborn Tabby mice was in the 0.25-1 μg range, which is similar to what is obtained with Fc-EDA1. These findings are remarkable in the sense that the anti-EDAR mAb were 10- to more than 1000-fold less efficient in vitro than Fc-EDA1, indicating that the pharmacological features of immunoglobulin G are well suited to convey in vivo EDAR agonist properties.

### Example 8

**Correction of the Tabby Phenotype Following Injection of Anti-EDAR mAb in Pregnant Mice (FIG. 17-22)**

It was evaluated whether the intravenous administration of anti-EDAR mAb in pregnant Tabby mice had the capacity to correct the Tabby phenotype in the offspring. Gravid mice were treated at days 13 and 20 (E13/E20) or 9 and 17 (E9/E17) of gestation with 400 μg anti-EDAR mAb mAbEDAR3. Macroscopic and histological studies were then conducted on mice born from these mothers at six months of age. Many features of the Tabby phenotype were corrected in the mice treated with anti-EDAR mAb during their foetal life. The overall body appearance of the mice was modified. Specifically, the fur was darker and denser than in untreated Tabby mice, and the eyes were wide open. These features can be observed on the pictures of FIG. 17. Noticeably, the fur of the treated mice was also darker than in wild type mice (FIGS. 17 and 18). Similarly, fur of the ventral face of the treated animals was darker and denser than in Tabby mice (FIG. 18). Correction of features of the Tabby phenotype was further illustrated by the observation that in treated Tabby mice, hair was observed on the tail and functional sweat glands detected on the footpads using the starch and iodine test (FIG. 17).

The absence of hair behind the ears is an additional macroscopic feature characterizing Tabby mice. Following exposure to anti-EDAR mAb during foetal development, the treated mice showed hair growth behind the ears to an extent similar to what is observed in wild type mice (FIG. 19).

Histological analyses showed that the development of sweat glands on the footpads, mucus-producing cells in the trachea and larynx and hair follicles on the tail of Tabby mice was induced by treatment with anti-EDAR mAb during their foetal life (FIG. 20-22). Remarkably, tissue sections from wild type mice and from treated Tabby mice were undistinguishable, indicating that that the anti-EDAR mAb are capable of largely correcting the skin abnormalities in these mice.

### Example 9

**Development of Teeth in Tabby Mice Treated During their Foetal Life with Anti-EDAR mAb (FIG. 23)**

The dentition of Tabby mice treated with anti-EDAR mAb during their foetal life was examined at six months of age. The teeth from treated Tabby mice and wild type mice were very similar in terms of number, size and shape (i.e. number of cusps). This was particularly striking for the first molars of the upper and lower jaws, which are largely underdeveloped in Tabby mice. The first molars had similar appearance in treated Tabby mice and in wild type mice.

**Example 10**

**Modified Hair Morphology Following Injection of Anti-EDAR mAb in Newborn Wild Type or Tabby Mice (FIG. 24-28)**

In order to study the impact of anti-EDAR mAb on hair growth, newborn wild type mice were injected or not at days 0, 4, 7, 11 and 14 after birth with the anti-EDAR mAb mAbEDAR3 at 5 mg/kg or PBS. Fur of treated mice examined at day 18 after birth had a ruffled and greasy appearance, as compared with fur of control mice, which was smoothly arranged over the body. This feature was apparent for both the dorsal and the ventral sides of the animals (FIG. 24).

Microscopic examination of zig-zag hairs showed that treatment with anti-EDAR mAb resulted in the thinning of both zig-zag and awl hairs as compared with untreated one. Thinning of awl hair was particularly evident on hair of the belly, which are lightly pigmented and presented two instead of three parallel stacks of cells. In addition, the characteristic kinks of zigzag hairs were lost or strongly attenuated. Hair pigmentation was increased, which was particularly apparent in awl hair from the back of the mice (FIG. 25). This latter observation explains the darker appearance of the fur in treated animals (FIG. 24). Treatment did no affect the growth curves of the animals (FIG. 26). Similar effect on fur appearance and hair morphology was observed when newborn mice were treated with mAbEDAR1 (FIG. 27).

It was also questioned whether the appearance of the fur and the morphology of the hairs were stably modified by anti-EDAR mAb treatment, or would eventually revert to the initial prevailing situation. The hair phenotype gradually disappeared as mice were ageing, probably reflecting a situation where the agonist anti-EDAR mAb had been cleared and the modified hair replaced by new hair grown in subsequent hair cycles (FIG. 24, day 175).

Tabby mice have a single hair type that is intermediate between awl and auchene, that we will call “intermediate” type of hair. Newborn Tabby mice treated with mAbEDAR1 at 5 mg/kg at days 0, 4, 7, 11 and 14 also developed fluffy, untidy and darker fur (FIG. 28), characterized by the presence of modified intermediate hair that are thinner and composed of a single stack of cells, reminiscent of the structure of wild type zigzag hair (FIG. 28).

Together, these results indicate that agonist anti-EDAR mAb administered during the first phase of hair growth similarly affect hair morphology and pigmentation in both wild-type and EDA-deficient mice.

**Example 11**

**Modified Hair Morphology Following Injection of Anti-EDAR mAb in Adult Wild-Type and Tabby Mice (FIG. 29-31)**

It is a possibility that the hair phenotype observed in newborn mice treated with anti-EDAR antibodies might be the result of an alteration of hair follicle development, but would not take place in established, adult hair follicles. The effects of the anti-EDAR mAb were therefore investigated in adult wild type mice. Three weeks-old mice were depilated on the back, and treated intraperitoneally at 5 mg/kg with mAbEDAR1 at days 0, 4, 7, 11 and 14 post-depilation. This treatment allowed one to make observations only on hairs in the process of growing at the time of antibody application. Remarkably, hair grown back in the depilated area, as assessed at day 21 after depilation, appeared thinner and was considerably darker in treated than in untreated animals (FIG. 29). This correlated with morphological changes, as assessed by microscopy, with deeply coloured awl hair, and thinner zigzag hairs (FIG. 30). Overall, hair morphology in treated adult wild type mice was very similar to that observed in treated newborn wild type mice. The reversibility of the effect was further studied in ageing mice. While fur remained darker in treated mice for about 5 months following mAb treatment (FIG. 29, day 146), hair was replaced by normal-looking hair in subsequent hair cycles (FIG. 29, day 189). These results indicated that the effects of the anti-EDAR mAb on fur appearance and hair morphology are largely reversible.

In order to assess the effects of the anti-EDAR mAb on hair growth and morphology in adult, EDA-deficient mice, 9 weeks-old Tabby mice were depilated on the back, and intraperitoneally injected at days 0, 4, 7, 11 and 14 post-depilation with 5 mg/kg of mAbEDAR1. Hair grown back in the depilated zone of the treated animals by day 17 after depilation was strikingly darker and coarser than in untreated animals (FIG. 31). The difference of hair texture was indeed confirmed by the microscopic analysis of hair morphology (FIG. 31). As observed in treated newborn Tabby mice, the intermediate hair of treated adult Tabby grown during the treatment period have a single stack of cells instead of 2 or 3, resembling the structure of zigzag hair, the most abundant hair type in wild type mice.

Importantly, these results establish that EDAR is expressed and is functional in adult wild type and Tabby mice. This was unanticipated, as the results collected so far indicated that the activity of Fc-EDA1 faded within a few days after birth. These results suggest that the anti-EDAR mAb are therapeutically beneficial in adult XLHED patients.

Furthermore, the effects of the anti-EDAR mAb on hair morphology and colour of newborn and adult, wild type and EDA-deficient mice were not anticipated (see FIGS. 24 to 31). They constitute the first observations that pharmacological EDAR agonists are active in adult wild type and EDA-deficient mice. In the presence of mAbEDARs, hairs become consistently thinner and, at least for awl hairs, darker. It is striking that the intermediate type of hairs in EDA-deficient mice, resembling awl hairs in that they are formed of more than one parallel stack of cells become zigzag-like hairs with a single stack of cells after treatment with EDAR agonists. These morphological changes occur during hair growth, and are reversible when the EDAR agonist have been cleared and that a new hair cycle begins

This phenotype implicates that EDAR agonists act on two different cell types: keratinocytes or keratinocyte-derived cells that form the hair and melanocytes that are responsible for hair pigmentation.

