# DESCRIPTION

## FIELD OF THE INVENTION

This invention relates to the field of genetic engineering. Specifically, the invention relates to the construction of operons to produce biologically active agents. For example, operons may be constructed to produce agents that control the function of biochemical pathway proteins (e.g., protein phosphatases, kinases and/or proteases). Such agents may include inhibitors and modulators that may be used in studying or controlling phosphatase function associated with abnormalities in a phosphatase pathway or expression level. Fusion proteins, such as light activated protein phosphatases, may be genetically encoded and expressed as photoswitchable phosphatases. Systems are provided for use in controlling phosphatase function within living cells or in identifying small molecule inhibitors/activator/modulator molecules of protein phosphatases associated with cell signaling.

## BACKGROUND

Protein phosphorylation is involved with cell signaling as in part it controls the location and timing of cellular differentiation, movement, proliferation, and death1-4; its misregulation is implicated in cancer, diabetes, obesity, and Alzheimer's disease, among other disorders5-9. Optical tools to exert spatiotemporal control over the activity of phosphorylation-regulating enzymes in living cells could elucidate the mechanisms by which cells transmit, filter, and integrate chemical signals10,11, reveal links between seemingly disparate physiological processes (e.g., memory12 and metabolism13), and facilitate the identification of new targets for phosphorylation-modulating therapeutics (a class of pharmaceuticals14). Therefore, there is a need for developing tools to control, reduce, or enhance the activity of phosphorylation-regulating enzymes in living cells.

## SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

This invention relates to the field of genetic engineering. Specifically, the invention relates to the construction of operons to produce biologically active agents. For example, operons may be constructed to produce agents that control the function of biochemical pathway proteins (e.g., protein phosphatases, kinases and/or proteases). Such agents may include inhibitors and modulators that may be used in studying or controlling phosphatase function associated with abnormalities in a phosphatase pathway or expression level. Fusion proteins, such as light activated protein phosphatases, may be genetically encoded and expressed as photoswitchable phosphatases. Systems are provided for use in controlling phosphatase function within living cells or in identifying small molecule inhibitors/activator/modulator molecules of protein phosphatases associated with cell signaling.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a genetic operon comprising: a) providing; i) a first gene encoding a first fusion protein, the first fusion protein comprising a substrate recognition domain and either a DNA-binding domain or an anchoring unit for RNA polymerase; ii) a second gene encoding a second fusion protein, the second fusion protein comprising an enzyme substrate domain and either an anchoring unit for RNA polymerase or a DNA binding domain; iii) a first DNA sequence comprising a binding site for said DNA-binding domain; iv) a second DNA sequence comprising a binding site, proximal to the first, for said anchoring unit and for said RNA polymerase; v) a third gene encoding a first enzyme, wherein said first enzyme is capable of modifying said substrate domain, thereby changing the affinity of said substrate recognition domain; vi) a fourth gene encoding a second enzyme, wherein said second enzyme is capable unmodifying said substrate domain; vii) a reporter gene encoding at least one capable of having a detectable output when said RNA polymerase and said anchoring unit binds to said second DNA sequence binding site after association of the two fusion proteins. In one embodiment, said substrate domain is a peptide substrate of a protein kinase. In one embodiment, said substrate domain is a peptide substrate of a protein tyrosine kinase. In one embodiment, said substrate domain is a peptide substrate of Src kinase (a protein tyrosine kinase). In one embodiment, said substrate recognition domain is capable of binding to said substrate domain in its phosphorylated state. In one embodiment, said substrate recognition domain is capable of binding to said substrate domain in its unphosphorylated state. In one embodiment, said DNA-binding domain is the 434 cI repressor and said DNA binding site is the binding sequence for that repressor. In one embodiment, said anchoring unit is the omega subunit of RNA polymerase and said second DNA binding site is the binding site for RNA polymerase. In one embodiment, said substrate domain is a peptide substrate of a protein kinase. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises a system of proteins. In one embodiment, said first enzyme is a protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, said first enzyme is a protein tyrosine phosphatase. In one embodiment, said first enzyme is protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B. In one embodiment, said second enzyme is a protein kinase. In one embodiment, said second enzyme is a protein tyrosine kinase. In one embodiment, said second enzyme is Src kinase. In one embodiment, said reporter protein yields a detectable output. In one embodiment, said reporter protein that yields a detectable output is a LuxAB bioreporters (e.g., output is a luminescence). In one embodiment, said reporter protein that yields a detectable output is a fluorescent protein. In one embodiment, said reporter protein that yields a detectable output is mClover. In one embodiment, said reporter protein that yields a detectable output confers antibiotic resistance. In one embodiment, said antibiotic resistance is to spectinomycin. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises a gene encoding a decoy protein fusion comprising: (i) a second enzyme substrate domain that is different from the first enzyme substrate domain and (ii) a protein that that does not bind specifically to DNA and/or to RNA polymerase, and a fifth gene encoding a third enzyme, wherein said third enzyme is capable of being active on the decoy substrate domain. In one embodiment, both said first enzyme substrate domain (of the base system) and said second enzyme substrate domain (of the decoy) are substrates of a protein kinases. In one embodiment, both said first enzyme substrate domain (of the base system) and said second enzyme substrate domain (of the decoy) are substrates of a protein tyrosine kinase. In one embodiment, both said first enzyme substrate domain (of the base system) and said second enzyme substrate domain (of the decoy) are substrates of Src kinase. In one embodiment, both said first enzyme substrate domain (of the base system) and said second substrate domain (of the decoy) are substrates of a protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, both said first enzyme substrate domain (of the base system) and said second substrate domain (of the decoy) are substrates of a protein tyrosine phosphatase. In one embodiment, both said first enzyme substrate domain (of the base system) and said second substrate domain (of the decoy) are substrates of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B. In one embodiment, said first enzyme is a light modulated enzyme. In one embodiment, said first enzyme is a protein-LOV2 chimera. In one embodiment, said first enzyme is a PTP1B-LOV2 chimera. In one embodiment, said proteins that yield a detectable output include a protein that generates a toxic product in the presence of a non-essential substrate. In one embodiment, said additional protein is SacB, which converts sucrose to a nonstructural polysaccharide that is toxic in E. coli. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises an expression vector and a bacterial cell.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a system for detecting inhibitors of an enzyme, comprising: a) providing; i) an operon comprising a gene encoding an enzyme; ii) a bacterium cell; iii) a small molecule test compound; and b) contacting said bacterium with said operon such that said contacted bacterium is capable of producing a detectable output; c) growing said contacted bacterium in the presence of said test compound under conditions allowing said detectable output; and d) assessing the influence of the test compound on said detectable output. In one embodiment, said enzyme is a protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, said enzyme is a protein tyrosine phosphatase. In one embodiment, said enzyme, is protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method for evolving inhibitors of an enzyme, comprising: a) providing: i) an operon comprising a gene encoding an enzyme; ii) a library of bacteria cells, wherein each said bacteria cells has at least one mutated metabolic pathway; b) growing said library of bacteria cells; and c) screening said library of bacterial cells for a detectable output. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises an expression vector.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method for detecting selective inhibitors of a first enzyme over a second enzyme, comprising: a) providing; i) a system as described above comprising a library of bacterial cells; and ii) a small molecule test compound; b) growing said library of bacterial cells in the presence of the test compound; and c) assessing an influence of the test compound on a detectable output. In one embodiment, the system further provides an operon comprising a gene encoding a decoy fusion protein, said decoy fusion protein comprising; (i) a second enzyme substrate domain that is different from the first enzyme substrate domain and (ii) a protein that that does not bind specifically to DNA and/or RNA polymerase. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises an expression vector.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method for evolving selective inhibitors of a first enzyme over a second enzyme, comprising; a) providing; a system as described herein comprising a library of bacterial cells having mutated metabolic pathways; b) growing said bacterial cell library; and b) screening the bacterial cell library for a detectable output. In one embodiment, the method further provides an operon comprising a gene encoding a decoy fusion protein, the decoy fusion protein comprising; (i) a second enzyme substrate domain that is different from the first enzyme substrate domain and (ii) a protein that that does not bind specifically to DNA and/or RNA polymerase. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises an expression vector.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method for evolving photoswitchable enzymes, comprising; a) providing; i) a system as described herein comprising a bacterial cell library having mutated photoswitchable enzymes; b) growing the bacterial cell library under at least two different light conditions; and c) comparing differences in detectable output for each cell between each of said two different light conditions. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises an expression vector.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method for evolving photoswitchable enzymes, comprising: a) providing; i) a system as described herein comprising a library of bacterial cells have mutated photoswitchable enzymes; b) growing the library of bacterial cells under a first light source in which activity is desired; c) subsequently growing the library of bacterial cells from step b) in the presence of: (i) a non-essential substrate; and (ii) a second light source in which activity is not desired; d) subsequently screening survivors of step c) for a mutant bacterial cell; and e) examining the mutant bacterial cell for activity under the first light source and the second light source. In one embodiment, the method further comprises an operon comprising a gene encoding a decoy fusion protein, the decoy fusion protein comprising; (i) a second enzyme substrate domain that is different from the first enzyme substrate domain; and (ii) a protein that that does not bind specifically to DNA and/or RNA polymerase. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises an expression vector.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method for evolving selective mutants of an enzyme, comprising: a) providing; a system as described above comprising a library of bacterial cells having a mutant enzyme; b) growing the library of bacterial cells; and c) comparing a detectable output between the cells to identify the mutant enzyme. In one embodiment, the method further comprises an operon comprising a gene encoding a decoy fusion protein, the decoy fusion protein comprising; (i) a second enzyme substrate domain that is different from the first enzyme substrate domain; and (ii) a protein that that does not bind specifically to DNA and/or RNA polymerase. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises an expression vector.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method for evolving substrate domains selective for an enzyme, comprising: a) providing; a method as described above comprising a library of bacterial cells comprising substrate domains fused to DNA binding domains; b) growing the library of bacterial cells in the presence of an inducer for a first enzyme and a non-essential substrate; c) subsequently growing the library of bacterial cells from step b) in the presence of an inducer for a second enzyme; and d) subsequently screening for survivor bacterial cells, thereby identifying substrates that bind to the first enzyme but not to the second enzyme. In one embodiment, said system comprises a reporter protein that yields a detectable output. In one embodiment, the reporter protein generates a toxic product in the presence of a non-essential substrate. In one embodiment, the system further comprises an operon comprising a gene selected from the group consisting of a first inducible promoter for a first enzyme and a second inducible promoter for a second enzyme, wherein the second enzyme has a similar activity to the first enzyme.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method of using a microbial biosensor comprising an operon, wherein said operon comprises; a) providing a reporter gene and a sensor fusion protein gene; and b) expressing said sensor fusion protein with a post-translational modification and the reporter gene. In one embodiment, said expressed sensor fusion protein has a protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain and is capable of binding to said DNA binding sequences in the presence of at least one expressible sensor fusion protein as a recognition domain (SH2) for said protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain attached to a phosphate molecule. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises gene segments encoding: i) a first expressible sensor fusion protein as a protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain capable of attaching to said phosphate molecule, said first expressible sensor fusion protein is in an operable combination with a DNA-binding protein; and ii) a second expressible sensor fusion protein as a recognition domain (SH2) for said protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain when attached to a phosphate molecule, said second expressible sensor fusion protein is in operable combination with a subunit of an RNA polymerase; and iii) individual expressible fragments including, but not limited to, a Src kinase protein; a protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) and conjugated to said transcriptionally active binding sequences capable of binding to said DNA-binding protein of sensor fusion protein and said subunit of an RNA polymerase in operable combination with said reporter gene.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method of using a microbial biosensor comprising; a) providing; i) an operon, wherein said operon comprises a reporter gene and a sensor fusion protein gene; ii) a living bacterium; and iii) a test small molecule inhibitor of said protein tyrosine phosphatase enzyme; b) expressing said sensor fusion protein with a post-translational modification and a reporter gene; c) contacting said bacterium with said test small molecule; and d) determining whether said test small molecule is an inhibitor for said protein phosphatase enzyme by expression of said reporter gene. In one embodiment, said expressed sensor fusion protein has a protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain that is capable of binding to a DNA binding sequence in the presence of at least one expressible sensor fusion protein as a recognition domain (SH2) for said protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain attached to a phosphate molecule. In one embodiment, said expressed sensor fusion protein has a protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B substrate domain that is capable of binding to said DNA binding sequences in the presence of at least one expressible sensor fusion protein as a recognition domain (SH2) for said protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain attached to a phosphate molecule. In one embodiment, said operon further comprises gene segments encoding: i) said first expressible sensor fusion protein as said protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain capable of attaching to said phosphate molecule that is in operable combination with a DNA-binding; and ii) said second expressible sensor fusion protein as a recognition domain (SH2) for said protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain when attached to a phosphate molecule that is in operable combination with a subunit of an RNA polymerase; and iii) individual expressible fragments including but not limited to, a Src kinase protein; a protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) and conjugated to said transcriptionally active binding sequences capable of binding to said DNA-binding protein of sensor fusion protein and said subunit of an RNA polymerase in operable combination with said reporter gene. In one embodiment, said biosensor further comprises an operon component for expressing a second gene. In one embodiment, said biosensor further comprises an operon component for expressing a second PTP that is different from the first PTP for identifying a said inhibitor selective for one of the TPT enzymes. In one embodiment, said test small molecule inhibitor includes, but is not limited to, abietane-type diterpenes, abietic acid (AA), dihydroabietic acid and structural variants thereof.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method of using a microbial biosensor, comprising: a) providing; i) an operon, wherein said operon comprises a reporter gene and a sensor fusion protein gene; ii) a living bacterium; and iii) a test small molecule inhibitor of said protein tyrosine phosphatase enzyme; b) expressing said sensor fusion protein with a post-translational modification and the reporter gene; c) expressing said expressible sensor fusion proteins in said bacterium; d) contacting said bacterium with said test small molecule; and e) determining whether said test small molecule is an inhibitor for said protein phosphatase enzyme by expression of said reporter gene. In one embodiment, said expressed sensor fusion protein has a protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain and is capable of binding to said DNA binding sequences in the presence of at least one expressible sensor fusion protein as a recognition domain (SH2) for said protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain attached to a phosphate molecule. In one embodiment, the expressed sensor fusion protein has a protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B substrate domain and capable of binding to said DNA binding sequences in the presence of at least one expressible sensor fusion protein as a recognition domain (SH2) for said protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain attached to a phosphate molecule, and an individual expressible fragment for a photoswitchable protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B. In one embodiment, said operon comprises gene segments encoding: i) said first expressible sensor fusion protein as said protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain that is capable of attaching to said phosphate molecule in operable combination with a DNA-binding protein; ii) said second said expressible sensor fusion protein as a recognition domain (SH2) for said protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate domain when attached to a phosphate molecule that is in operable combination with a subunit of an RNA polymerase; and iii) individual expressible fragments including, but not limited to, a Src kinase protein; a protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) and conjugated to said transcriptionally active binding sequences capable of binding to said DNA-binding protein of sensor fusion protein and said subunit of an RNA polymerase in operable combination with said reporter gene.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method for providing variants of chemical structures for use as a potential therapeutic, comprising: a) providing; i) an E. coli bacterium comprising a metabolic terpenoid chemical structure-producing pathway providing an altered chemical structure, wherein said metabolic pathway comprises a synthetic enzyme, wherein said E. coli further comprises a microbial biosensor operon for detecting PTP inhibition; and ii) a mutated synthetic enzyme of system of enzymes; a) introducing said mutated synthetic enzyme of system of enzymes; c) expressing said mutated synthetic enzyme under conditions wherein said mutated synthetic enzyme or system of enzymes alters/alter the chemical structure of said terpenoid chemical structure; and d) determining whether said altered chemical structure is an inhibitor for said PTP as a test inhibitor for use as a potential therapeutic. In one embodiment, said metabolic pathway comprises synthetic enzymes including, but not limited to, terpene synthases, cytochrome P450s, halogenases, methyl transferases, or terpenoid-functionalizing enzymes. In one embodiment, said terpenoid includes, but is not limited to, labdane-related diterpenoids. In one embodiment, said terpenoid includes but is not limited to, abietane-type diterpenoids. In one embodiment, said terpenoid is abietic acid.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a fusion protein DNA construct, comprising a protein phosphatase gene and a protein light switch gene conjugated within said phosphatase gene, wherein said protein phosphatase gene encodes a protein with a C-terminal domain and said protein light switch gene encodes a protein with an N-terminal alpha helical region such that said C-terminal domain is conjugated to said N-terminal alpha helical region. In one embodiment, said construct further comprises an expression vector and a living cell. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is a protein tyrosine phosphatase. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B). In one embodiment, said C-terminal domain encodes an α7 helix of PTP1B. In one embodiment, said construct encodes PTP1BPS-A. In one embodiment, said construct encodes PTP1BPS-B. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is T-Cell protein tyrosine phosphatases (TC-PTP). In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domain. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is the LOV2 domain of phototropin 1 form Avena sativa. In one embodiment, said LOV2 domain comprises an A′a helix of LOV2. In one embodiment, said LOV2 has at least one mutation resulting in an amino acid mutation. It is not meant to limit such mutations. In fact, a mutation may include but is not limited to a nucleotide substitution, the addition of a nucleotide, and the deletion of a nucleotide from said gene. In one embodiment, said mutation is a substitution of a nucleotide. In one embodiment, said A′a helix of LOV2 has a T406A mutation. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a phytochrome protein. In one embodiment, said phytochrome protein is a bacterial phytochrome protein. In one embodiment, said bacterial phytochrome protein is a bacterial phytochrome protein 1 (BphP1) from Rhodopseudomonas palustris. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domain with an artificial chromophore. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a phytochrome protein with an artificial chromophore.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a fusion protein, comprising a protein phosphatase and a protein light switch conjugated within said phosphatase, wherein said protein phosphatase has a C-terminal domain and said protein light switch has a N-terminal alpha helical region such that said C-terminal domain is conjugated to said N-terminal alpha helical region. In one embodiment, said fusion protein further comprises an expression vector and a living cell. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is a protein tyrosine phosphatase. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B). In one embodiment, said C-terminal domain encodes an α7 helix. In one embodiment, said fusion protein is PTP1BPS-A. In one embodiment, said fusion protein is PTP1BPS-B. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is T-Cell protein tyrosine phosphatases (TC-PTP). In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domain. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is the LOV2 domain of phototropin 1 form Avena sativa. In one embodiment, said LOV2 domain comprises an A′a helix of LOV2. In one embodiment, said A′a helix of LOV2 has a T406A mutation. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domain with an artificial chromophore. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a phytochrome protein with an artificial chromophore. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a phytochrome protein. In one embodiment, said phytochrome protein is a bacterial phytochrome protein. In one embodiment, said bacterial phytochrome protein is a bacterial phytochrome protein 1 (BphP1) from Rhodopseudomonas palustris. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domain with an artificial chromophore. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a phytochrome protein with an artificial chromophore.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method of using a fusion protein, comprising; a) providing; i) a fusion protein; ii) a protein phosphatase, and iii) a living cell; and b) introducing said fusion protein in said a living cell such that illumination of said light switch alters a feature in said living cell. In one embodiment, said feature includes but is not limited to controlling cell movement, morphology, controlling cell signaling and having a modulatory effect. In one embodiment, said modulatory effect includes but is not limited to inactivation, activation, reversible inactivation and reversible activation. In one embodiment, said modulatory effect is dose dependent. In one embodiment, said illumination is light within the range of 450-500 nm. In one embodiment, said illumination is light within the range of 600-800 nm. In one embodiment, said protein light switch undergoes light-induced conformational change and said protein phosphatase has allosterically modulated catalytic activity that is altered by said conformational change. In one embodiment, said altering is enhanced or reduced. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domain with an artificial chromophore. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a phytochrome protein with an artificial chromophore. In one embodiment, said living cell has an activity. In one embodiment, said living cell is in vivo. In one embodiment, said method further comprises a step of controlling said cellular activity in vivo.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a method for detecting a small molecule modulator of a protein phosphatase, comprising: a) providing; i) a fusion protein comprising a protein phosphatase and protein light switch; ii) a visual readout for phosphatase activity; iii) an optical source, wherein said source is capable of emitting light radiation; iv) a living cell; and v) a small molecule test compound; b) expressing said fusion protein in said living cell; c) contacting said living cell with said small molecule test compound; d) illuminating said fusion protein within said cell with said optical source; e) measuring a visual readout for a change in phosphatase activity for identifying said small molecule test compound as a modulator of said activity of said phosphatase; and f) using said modulatory small molecule test compound for treating a patient exhibiting at least one symptom of a disease associated with said phosphatase. In one embodiment, said method further comprises identifying said small molecule test compound as an inhibitor of the activity of said phosphatase. In one embodiment, said method further comprises identifying said small molecule test compound as an activator of the activity of said phosphatase. In one embodiment, said disease includes but is not limited to diabetes, obesity, cancer, anxiety, autoimmunity, or neurodegenerative diseases. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domain with an artificial chromophore. In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a phytochrome protein with an artificial chromophore. In one embodiment, said method further provides a fluorescence-based biosensor, and comprises a step of introducing said fluorescence-based biosensor into said cell. In one embodiment, said method further comprises a step of controlling said cellular activity in vivo. In one embodiment, said visual readout for phosphatase activity is selected from the group consisting of a fluorescence-based biosensor; changes in cell morphology; and changes in cell motility.

In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a photoswitchable protein tyrosine phosphatase enzyme construct comprising an N-terminal alpha helix of a protein light switch conjugated to a C-terminal allosteric domain region. In one embodiment, said protein tyrosine phosphatase enzyme is protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B). In one embodiment, said protein light switch is a LOV2 domain of phototropin 1 derived from Avena sativa (wild oats). In one embodiment, said enzyme construct further comprises an expression vector. In one embodiment, the present invention contemplates a biosensor for enzyme activity, comprising; a) a substrate domain as described above; b) a substrate recognition domain; c) a first fluorescent protein; and d) a second fluorescent protein.

In one embodiment, the invention provides a genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules that modulate enzyme activity, comprising, a. a first region in operable combination comprising: i. a first promoter; ii. a first gene encoding a first fusion protein comprising a substrate recognition domain linked to a DNA-binding protein; iii. a second gene encoding a second fusion protein comprising a substrate domain linked to a protein capable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA; iv. a second promoter; v. a third gene for a protein kinase; vi. a fourth gene for a molecular chaperone; vii. a fifth gene for a protein phosphatase; b. a second region in operable combination comprising: i. a first DNA sequence encoding an operator for said DNA-binding protein; ii. a second DNA sequence encoding a binding site for RNA polymerase; and iii. one or more genes of interest (GOI). In one embodiment, said first promoter is Prol. In one embodiment, said substrate recognition domain is a substrate homology 2 (SH2) domain from H. sapiens. In one embodiment, said DNA-binding protein is the 434 phage cI repressor. In one embodiment, said substrate domain is a peptide substrate of both said kinase and said phosphatase. In one embodiment, said second promoter is ProD. In one embodiment, said protein capable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA is the omega subunit of RNA polymerase (i.e., RpoZ or RPω). In one embodiment, said protein kinase is Src kinase from H. sapiens. In one embodiment, said molecular chaperone is CDCl37 (i.e., the Hsp90 co-chaperone) from H. sapiens. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) from H. sapiens. In one embodiment, said operator is the operator for 434 phage cI repressor. In one embodiment, said binding site for RNA polymerase is the −35 to −10 region of the lacZ promoter. In one embodiment, said gene of interest is SpecR, a gene that confers resistance to spectinomycin. In one embodiment, said genes of interest are LuxA and LuxB, two genes that yield a luminescent output. In one embodiment, said gene of interest is a gene that confers resistance to an antibiotic. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is PTPN6 from H. sapiens. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP). In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is the catalytic domain of a PTP. In one embodiment, an alignment of the X-ray crystal structures of (i) the catalytic domain of said protein phosphatase and (ii) the catalytic domain of PTP1B yields a root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of less than or equal to 0.95 Å (as defined by a function similar to the PyMol function align). In one embodiment, said catalytic domain of said protein phosphatase has at least 34.1% sequence identity with the catalytic domain of PTP1B. In one embodiment, said catalytic domain of said phosphatase has at least 53.5% sequence similarity with the catalytic domain of PTP1B. In one embodiment, said protein kinase is a protein tyrosine kinase (PTK). In one embodiment, said protein kinase is the catalytic domain of a PTK. In one embodiment, said first promoter is a constitutive promoter. In one embodiment, said second promoter is a constitutive promoter. In one embodiment, said first promoter is an inducible promoter. In one embodiment, said second promoter is an inducible promoter. In one embodiment, said binding site for RNA polymerase comprises part of a third promoter. In one embodiment, said first region lacks a gene for a molecular chaperone. In one embodiment, said first fusion protein consists of a substrate recognition domain linked a protein capable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA, and said second fusion protein consists of a substrate domain linked to a DNA-binding protein. In one embodiment, said first region further contains a third fusion protein (i.e., a “decoy”) comprising a second substrate domain, which is distinct from the first substrate domain, linked to a protein that is incapable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA. In one embodiment, said substrate domain of said third fusion protein is a peptide substrate of both said kinase and said phosphatase. In one embodiment, said substrate domain of said third fusion protein is a peptide substrate of said kinase but is a poor substrate of said phosphatase. In one embodiment, said first region further contains a sixth gene for a second protein phosphatase, which is distinct from the first protein phosphatase and which acts on said substrate domain of said third fusion protein.

In one embodiment, the invention provides a method for using both (i) a genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules that modulate enzyme activity and (ii) a genetically encoded pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis to identify and/or build terpenoids that modulate enzyme activity, comprising, a. providing, i. a genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules that modulate enzyme activity, comprising, 1. a first region in operable combination comprising: a. a first promoter; b. a first gene encoding a first fusion protein comprising a substrate recognition domain linked to a DNA-binding protein; c. a second gene encoding a second fusion protein comprising a substrate domain linked to a protein capable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA; d. a second promoter; e. a third gene for a protein kinase; f. a fourth gene for a molecular chaperone; g. a fifth gene for a protein phosphatase; 2. a second region in operable combination comprising: a. a first DNA sequence encoding an operator for said DNA-binding protein; b. a second DNA sequence encoding a binding site for RNA polymerase; c. one or more genes of interest (GOI); ii. a genetically encoded pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis comprising: 1. a pathway that generates linear isoprenoid precursors; 2. a gene for a terpene synthase (TS); 3. a plurality of E. coli bacteria; b. transforming said bacteria with both (i) said genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules and (ii) said genetically encoded pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis, and allowing said transformed bacteria to replicate; c. observing the expression of a gene of interest through a measurable output. In one embodiment, said pathway that generates linear isoprenoid precursors generates farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP). In one embodiment, said pathway that generates linear isoprenoid precursors is all or part of the mevalonate-dependent isoprenoid pathway of S. cerevisiae. In one embodiment, said pathway that generates linear isoprenoid precursors is carried by the plasmid pMBIS. In one embodiment, said gene of interest is SpecR, a gene that confers resistance to spectinomycin. In one embodiment, said TS gene is carried on a separate plasmid (pTS) from the rest of the terpenoid pathway. In one embodiment, said TS gene encodes for amorphadiene synthase (ADS) from Artemisia annua. In one embodiment, said TS gene encodes for γ-humulene synthase (GHS) from Abies grandis. In one embodiment, said TS gene encodes for abietadiene synthase (ABS) from Abies grandis, and this gene is carried in operable combination with a gene for geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GPPS). In one embodiment, said TS gene encodes for taxadiene synthase (TXS) from Taxus brevifolia, and this gene is carried in operable combination with a gene for GGPPS. In one embodiment, the method further comprises, d. extracting terpenoids that enable the highest measurable output (e.g., growth at the highest concentration of spectinomycin); e. identifying said terpenoids; f. purifying said terpenoids. In one embodiment, the method further comprises, providing, g. a mammalian cell culture, h. treating said cell cultures with purified terpenoids, i. measuring a biochemical effect that results from changes in the activity of a protein phosphatase or protein kinase. In one embodiment, the method further comprises, j. providing, a purified enzyme target, k. measuring the modulatory effect of purified terpenoids on the enzyme target, 1. quantifying that modulatory effect (e.g., by calculating an IC50). In one embodiment, said TS gene has at least one mutation. In one embodiment, said TS gene is in operable combination with a gene for an enzyme that functionalizes terpenoids. In one embodiment, said TS gene is in operable combination with a gene for a cytochrome P450. In one embodiment, said TS gene is in operable combination with a gene for cytochrome P450 BM3 from Bacillus megaterium. In one embodiment, said TS gene is in operable combination with a gene for a halogenase. In one embodiment, said TS gene is in operable combination with a gene for 6-halogenase (SttH) from Streptomyces toxytricini. In one embodiment, said TS gene is in operable combination with a gene for vanadium haloperoxidase (VHPO) from Acaryochloris marina. In one embodiment, said mammalian cell is a HepG2, Hela, Hek393t, MCF-7, and/or Cho-hIR cell. In one embodiment, said cells are BT474, SKBR3, or MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. In one embodiment, said biochemical effect is insulin receptor phosphorylation, which can be measured by a western blot or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In one embodiment, said cells are triple negative (TN) cell lines. In one embodiment, said cells are TN cells from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). In one embodiment, said cells are TN cells from ATCC TCP-1002. In one embodiment, said biochemical effect is cellular migration. In one embodiment, said biochemical effect is cellular viability. In one embodiment, said biochemical effect is cellular proliferation. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is PTP1B from H. sapiens. In one embodiment, said protein kinase is Src kinase from H. sapiens. In one embodiment, said gene of interest confers resistance to an antibiotic. In one embodiment, said gene of interest is SacB, a gene that confers sensitivity to sucrose. In one embodiment, said gene of interest confers conditional toxicity (i.e., toxicity in the presence of an exogenously added molecule). In one embodiment, said genes of interest are SpecR and SacB. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is the wild-type enzyme. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase has at least one mutation. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase has at least one mutation that reduces its sensitivity to a small molecule that modulates the activity of the wild-type protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, said protein kinase is the wild-type enzyme. In one embodiment, said protein kinase has at least one mutation. In one embodiment, said protein kinase has at least one mutation that reduces its sensitivity to a small molecule that modulates the activity of the wild-type protein kinase. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids inhibit a protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids inhibit a PTP. In one embodiment, said least one of said terpenoids inhibit PTP1B. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids activate a protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, said least one of said terpenoids activates a PTP. In one embodiment, said at least one of aid terpenoids activate protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 12 (PTPN12). In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids inhibit a protein kinase. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids inhibit a PTK. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoid inhibit Src kinase. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids activate a protein kinase. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids activate a PTK. In one embodiment, said genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules further contains both (i) a third fusion protein comprising a second substrate domain, which is distinct from the first substrate domain, linked to a protein that is incapable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA and (ii) a sixth gene for a second protein phosphatase, which is distinct from the first protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, said genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules further contains both (i) a third fusion protein comprising a second substrate domain, which is distinct from the first substrate domain, linked to a protein that is incapable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA and (ii) a sixth gene for a second protein kinase, which is distinct from the first protein kinase. In one embodiment, said genetically encoded pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis comprises, instead, a library of pathways that differ in the identity of the TS gene such that upon transformation, the majority of cells contain a distinct TS gene (i.e., a gene that differs by at least one mutation). In one embodiment, said genetically encoded pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis comprises, instead, a library of pathways that differ in the identity of a gene that functionalizes terpenoids (e.g., a cytochrome P450 or halogenase), in operable combination with the SI gene, such that upon transformation, the majority of cells contain a distinct gene that functionalizes terpenoids (i.e., a gene that differs by at least one mutation). In one embodiment, said genetically encoded pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis comprises, instead, a library of pathways in which the TS gene has been replaced by a component of a eukaryotic complementary DNA (cDNA) library such that upon transformation, the majority of cells contain a distinct gene in place of the TS gene. In one embodiment, said genetically encoded pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis comprises, instead, a library of pathways in which the TS gene accompanied by a component of a eukaryotic complementary DNA (cDNA) library such that upon transformation, the majority of cells contain a distinct gene in operable combination with the TS gene (e.g., a gene that may encode for a terpenoid-functionalizing enzyme). In one embodiment, said genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules comprises, instead, a library of such systems that differ in the identity of the protein phosphatase gene such that upon transformation, the majority of cells contain a distinct protein phosphatase gene (i.e., a gene that differs by at least one mutation). In one embodiment, said genetically encoded pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis generates a terpenoid that modulates the activity of the wild-type form of said protein phosphatase, thereby enabling the growth study to isolate a mutant of said protein phosphatase that is less sensitive to the modulatory effect of the small molecule. In one embodiment, said genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules comprises, instead, a library of such systems that differ in the identity of the protein kinase gene, such that upon transformation, the majority of cells contain a separate protein kinase gene (i.e., a gene that differs by at least one mutation). In one embodiment, said genetically encoded pathway for terpenoid biosynthesis generates a terpenoid that modulates the activity of the wild-type form of said protein kinase, thereby enabling the growth study to isolate a mutant of said protein kinase that is less sensitive to the modulatory effect of the small molecule. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids modulates the activity of the wild-type form of said protein phosphatase, but not a mutated form of said protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids modulates the activity of the said first protein phosphatase, but not the activity of said second protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids modulates the activity of the wild-type form of said protein kinase, but not a mutated form of said protein kinase. In one embodiment, said at least one of said terpenoids modulates the activity of said first protein kinase, but not the activity of said second protein kinase.

In one embodiment, the invention provides an inhibitor detection operon comprising, A: a first region in operable combination under control of a first promoter including: i. a first DNA sequence encoding a first fusion protein comprising a substrate recognition homology 2 domain (SH2) and a repressor; ii. a second DNA sequence encoding a second fusion protein comprising a phosphate molecule binding domain of a substrate recognition domain, said substrate recognition domain and an omega subunit of RNA polymerase (RpoZ or RP.); iii. a third DNA sequence encoding a Cell Division Cycle 37 protein (CDCl37); iv. a protein phosphatase; and B: a second region in operable combination under control of a second promoter comprising: i. an operator comprising a repressor binding domain said repressor, ii. a ribosome binding site (RB); and iii. a gene of interest (GOI). In one embodiment, said SH2 domain is a substrate recognition domain of said protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, said repressor is a 434 phage cI repressor. In one embodiment, said substrate recognition domain binds said protein phosphatase. In one embodiment, said decoy substrate domain is a Src kinase gene. In one embodiment, said operator is a 434cI operator. In one embodiment, said gene of interest encodes an antibiotic protein. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase is a protein tyrosine phosphatase. In one embodiment, said first promoter is constitutive promoter. In one embodiment, said second promoter is an inducible promoter.

In one embodiment, the invention provides a method of using an inhibitor detection operon, comprising, a. providing, i. a detection operon, comprising A: a first region in operable combination under control of a first promoter including: 1. a first DNA sequence encoding a first fusion protein comprising a protein phosphatase enzyme's substrate recognition homology 2 domain (SH2) and a repressor binding domain; 2. a second DNA sequence encoding a second fusion protein comprising a phosphate molecule binding domain of a protein phosphatase enzyme's substrate recognition domain, said protein phosphatase enzyme's substrate recognition domain and an omega subunit of RNA polymerase (RpoZ or RP.); 4. a third DNA sequence encoding a Cell Division Cycle 37 (CDCl37) protein; 5. a protein phosphatase enzyme; and B: a second region in operable combination under control of a second promoter comprising: 6. an operator comprising a repressor binding domain biding said repressor, 7. a ribosome binding site (RB); and 8. a gene of interest (GOI); and ii. a mevalonate pathway operon having a missing gene, such that said pathway operon does not contain at least one gene in said pathway for producing said terpenoid compound, under control of a third promoter comprising a second gene of interest for producing a terpenoid compound, iii. a fourth DNA sequence under control of a fourth promoter comprising said missing gene from said mevalonate pathway operon and a third gene of interest; and iv. a plurality of E. coli bacteria, and b. transfecting said E. coli bacteria with said first operon for expressing said first gene of interest; c. transfecting said E. coli bacteria with said mevalonate pathway operon for expressing said first and said second gene of interest; d. transfecting said E. coli bacteria with said fourth DNA sequence for expressing said first and said second and said third gene of interest; e. growing said cells wherein said inhibitor terpenoid compounds for protein phosphatase enzymes are produced by said cells. In one embodiment, said method further comprising step e. isolating said protein phosphatase inhibitor molecules and providing a mammalian cell culture for step f. treating said cell cultures for reducing activity of said protein phosphatase enzyme. In one embodiment, said method further providing an inducer compound for inducing said inducible promoter and a step of contacting said baceria with said compound. In one embodiment, said method wherein reducing activity of said protein phosphatase enzyme reduces growth of said mammalian cells. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase enzyme is human PTP1B. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase enzyme is wild-type. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase enzyme has at least one mutation. In one embodiment, said missing enzyme is a terpene synthase enzyme. In one embodiment, said terpene synthase enzyme is selected from the group consisting of amorphadiene synthase (ADS) and γ-humulene synthase (GHS). In one embodiment, said fourth DNA sequence further comprises a geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GPPS) and said missing enzyme is selected from the group consisting of abietadiene synthase (ABS) and taxadiene synthase (TXS). In one embodiment, said terpene synthase enzyme is wild-type. In one embodiment, said terpene synthase enzyme has at least one mutation. In one embodiment, said terpenoid compounds are structural variants of terpenoid compounds. In one embodiment, said genes of interest are antibiotic genes. In one embodiment, said genes of interest are each different antibiotic genes.

In one embodiment, said genetically encoded detection operon system, comprising; Part A: a first region of DNA in operable combination comprising: a region of DNA encoding a first promoter; a first gene encoding a first fusion protein comprising a substrate recognition domain linked to a DNA-binding protein; a second gene encoding a second fusion protein comprising a substrate domain linked to a protein capable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA; a region of DNA encoding a second promoter; a third gene for a protein kinase; a fourth gene for a molecular chaperone; a fifth gene for a protein phosphatase; Part B: a second region of DNA in operable combination under control of a second promoter comprising: a first DNA sequence encoding an operator for said DNA-binding protein; a second DNA sequence encoding a binding site for RNA polymerase; and at least one gene of interest (GOI). In one embodiment, said substrate recognition domain is a substrate homology 2 (SH2) domain. In one embodiment, said DNA-binding protein is the 434 phage cI repressor. In one embodiment, said substrate domain is a peptide substrate of both said kinase and said phosphatase In one embodiment, said protein capable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA is the omega subunit of RNA polymerase (RPω). In one embodiment, said gene for a kinase is a Src kinase gene. In one embodiment, said molecular chaperone is CDCl37. In one embodiment, said molecular chaperone is the Hsp90 co-chaperone) from H. sapiens. In one embodiment, said operator is a 434 phage cI operator. In one embodiment, said gene of interest is a gene for antibiotic resistance. In one embodiment, said gene for antibiotic resistance produces an enzyme that allow the bacteria to degrade an antibiotic protein. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase enzyme is protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B. In one embodiment, said first and second promoters of part A are constitutive promoters. In one embodiment, said second promoter of Part B is an inducible promoter.

In one embodiment, the invention provides a method of using a genetically encoded detection operon system, comprising, a. providing, i. an inhibitor detection operon, comprising Part A: a first region of DNA in operable combination comprising: 1. a region of DNA encoding a first promoter; 2. a first gene encoding a first fusion protein comprising a substrate recognition domain linked to a DNA-binding protein; 3. a second gene encoding a second fusion protein comprising a substrate domain linked to a protein capable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA; 4. a region of DNA encoding a second promoter; 5. a third gene for a protein kinase; 6. a fourth gene for a molecular chaperone; 7. a fifth gene for a protein phosphatase; Part B: a second region of DNA in operable combination under control of a second promoter comprising: 8. a first DNA sequence encoding an operator for said DNA-binding protein; 9. a second DNA sequence encoding a binding site for RNA polymerase; and 10. at least one gene of interest (GOI). ii. a mevalonate-terpene pathway operon not containing a terpene synthase gene, under control of a fourth promoter comprising a second gene of interest for producing a terpenoid compound, iii. a fourth DNA sequence under control of a fifth promoter comprising said terpene synthase gene and a third gene of interest; and iv. a plurality of bacteria, and b. transfecting said bacteria with said inhibitor detection operon for expressing said first gene of interest; c. transfecting said bacteria with said mevalonate pathway operon for expressing said second gene of interest; d. transfecting said bacteria with said fourth DNA sequence for expressing said third gene of interest; e. growing said bacteria cells expressing said three genes of interest wherein said inhibitor terpenoid compounds are produced by said bacteria cells inhibiting said protein phosphatase enzyme. In one embodiment, said method further comprising step e. isolating said protein phosphatase inhibitor molecules and providing a mammalian cell culture for step f. treating said cell cultures for reducing activity of said protein phosphatase enzyme. In one embodiment, said method wherein reducing activity of said protein phosphatase enzyme reduces growth of said mammalian cells. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase enzyme is human PTP1B. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase enzyme is wild-type. In one embodiment, said protein phosphatase enzyme has at least one mutation. In one embodiment, said mevalonate pathway operon comprises genes for expressing mevalonate kinase (ERG12), phosphomevalonate kinase (ERGS), mevalonate pyrophosphate decarboxylatse (MVD1), Isopentenyl pyrophosphate isomerase (IDI gene), and Farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) synthase (ispA). In one embodiment, said missing enzyme is a terpene synthase enzyme. In one embodiment, said terpene synthase enzyme is selected from the group consisting of amorphadiene synthase (ADS) and γ-humulene synthase (GHS). In one embodiment, said fourth DNA sequence further comprises a geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase (GPPS) and said terpene synthase is selected from the group consisting of abietadiene synthase (ABS) and taxadiene synthase (TXS). In one embodiment, said terpene synthase enzyme is wild-type. In one embodiment, said terpene synthase enzyme has at least one mutation. In one embodiment, said terpenoid compounds are structural variants of terpenoid compounds. In one embodiment, said genes of interest are antibiotic genes. In one embodiment, said genes of interest are each different antibiotic genes. In one embodiment, said method further provides an inducer compound for inducing said inducible promoter and a step of contacting said baceria with said compound.

In one embodiment, the invention provides a method for using both (i) a genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules that modulate enzyme activity and (ii) a genetically encoded pathway for polyketide biosynthesis to identify and/or build polyketides that modulate enzyme activity, comprising, providing, A genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules that modulate enzyme activity, comprising, a first region in operable combination comprising: a first promoter; a first gene encoding a first fusion protein comprising a substrate recognition domain linked to a DNA-binding protein; a second gene encoding a second fusion protein comprising a substrate domain linked to a protein capable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA; a second promoter; a third gene for a protein kinase; a fourth gene for a molecular chaperone; a fifth gene for a protein phosphatase; a second region in operable combination comprising: a first DNA sequence encoding an operator for said DNA-binding protein; a second DNA sequence encoding a binding site for RNA polymerase; one or more genes of interest (GOI); a genetically encoded pathway for polyketide biosynthesis comprising; a gene for a polyketide synthase; a plurality of E. coli bacteria. In one embodiment, said polyketide synthase is 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase (DEBS). In one embodiment, said polyketide synthase (PKS) is a modular combination of different PKS components.

In one embodiment, the invention provides a method for using both (i) a genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules that modulate enzyme activity and (ii) a genetically encoded pathway for polyketide biosynthesis to identify and/or build alkaloids that modulate enzyme activity, comprising, a. providing, a genetically encoded system for detecting small molecules that modulate enzyme activity, comprising, a first region in operable combination comprising: a first promoter; a first gene encoding a first fusion protein comprising a substrate recognition domain linked to a DNA-binding protein; a second gene encoding a second fusion protein comprising a substrate domain linked to a protein capable of recruiting RNA polymerase to DNA; a second promoter; a third gene for a protein kinase; a fourth gene for a molecular chaperone; a fifth gene for a protein phosphatase; a second region in operable combination comprising: a first DNA sequence encoding an operator for said DNA-binding protein; a second DNA sequence encoding a binding site for RNA polymerase; one or more genes of interest (GOI); a genetically encoded pathway for polyketide biosynthesis comprising, a pathway for alkaloid biosynthesis. a plurality of E. coli bacteria. In one embodiment, said pathway for alkaloid biosynthesis described herein.

In one embodiment, the invention provides an engineered bacreria cell line comprising expression plasmid 1, plasmid 2, plasmid 3 and plasmid 4.

In one embodiment, the invention provides a phosphatase inhibitor molecule produced by a bacterium expressing a plasmid 1 in contact with an inducer molecule for inducing a promoter expressing a terpenoid synthesis pathway operon in plasmid 2 and a terpene synthase enzyme in plasmid 3, wherien said plasmid 2 and plasmid 3 are coexpressed in said bacteria with plasmid 1. In one embodiment, said paslmid 2 and said plasmid 3 are under control of an inducible promoter. In one embodiment, said bacterium is contacted by an inducible molecule for inducing said promoter.

In one embodiment, the invention provides a bacteria strain producing a phosphatase inhibitor molecule. In one embodiment, said inhibitor is a terpenoid molecule.

## DEFINITIONS

As used herein, the use of the term “operon” may refer to a cluster of genes under the control of a single promoter (as in a classical definition of an operon) and may also refer to a genetically encoded system comprising multiple operons (e.g., the bacterial two-hybrid system).

As used herein, “phosphorylation-regulating enzymes” refer to proteins that regulate phosphorylation.

As used herein, “phosphorylation” refers to a biochemical process that involves the addition of phosphate to an organic compound.

As used herein, “optogenetic actuator” refers to a genetically encodable protein that undergoes light-induced changes in conformation.

As used herein, “dynamic range” refers to the ratio of activity in dark and light state (i.e., the initial rate in the dark/the initial rate in the presence of 455 nm light).

As used herein, “operon” refers to a unit made up of multiple genes that regulate other genes responsible for protein synthesis,

As used herein, “operably linked” refers to one or more genes (i.e. DNA sequences) suitably positioned and oriented in a DNA molecule for transcription to be initiated from the same promoter. DNA sequences that are operably linked to a promoter means that expression of the DNA sequence(s) is under transcriptional initiation regulation of the promoter.

As used herein, “construct” refers to an engineered molecule, e.g. ligated pieces of DNA as a DNA construct; a RNA construct as one contiguous sequence resulting from the expression of a DNA construct.

As used herein, “fusion” refers to an expressed product of an engineered construct i.e. a combination of several ligated sequences as one molecule or a single gene that encodes for a protein-protein fusion originally encoded by two genes.

As used herein, “expression vector” or “expression construct” refers to an operon, plasmid or virus designed for DNA expression of a construct in host cells, typically containing a promoter sequence operable within the host cell.

As used herein, “promoter” refers to a region of DNA that initiates transcription of a particular DNA sequence. Promoters are located near the transcription start sites of, towards the 5′ region of the sense strand. Promoters may be constitutive promoters, such as cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoters in mammalian cells, or inducible promoters, such as tetracycline-inducible promoters in mammalian cells.

As used herein, “transformation” refers to a foreign nucleic acid sequence or plasmid delivery into a prokaryotic host cell, for example, an expression plasmid (e.g. a plasmid expression construct) inserted into or taken up by a host cell.

As used herein, “transfection” refers to the insertion of a nucleic acid sequence into a eukaryotic cell.

Transformation and transfection may be transient, such that the nucleic acid sequence or plasmid introduced into the host cell is not permanently incorporated into the cellular genome. A stable transformation and transfection refers to a host cell retaining the foreign nucleic acid sequence or plasmid for multip generations regardless of whether the nucleic acid or plasmid was integrated into the genome of the host cell.

As used herein, “host” in reference to a cell refers to a cell intended for receiving a nucelic acid sequence or plasmid or already harboring a a nucelic acid sequence or plasmid, eg. a bacterium.

As used herein, “conjugate” refers to a covalently attachment of at least two compounds, for example, a photosensing element attached to a phosphatase protein.

As used herein, “decoy” in reference to a protein construct that cannot bind to DNA and/or RNA polymerase.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF INVENTION

This invention relates to the field of genetic engineering. Specifically, the invention relates to the construction of operons to produce biologically active agents. For example, operons may be constructed to produce agents that control the function of biochemical pathway proteins (e.g., protein phosphatases, kinases and/or proteases). Such agents may include inhibitors and modulators that may be used in studying or controlling phosphatase function associated with abnormalities in a phosphatase pathway or expression level. Fusion proteins, such as light activated protein phosphatases, may be genetically encoded and expressed as photoswitchable phosphatases. Systems are provided for use in controlling phosphatase function within living cells or in identifying small molecule inhibitors/activator/modulator molecules of protein phosphatases associated with cell signaling.

The invention also relates to the assembly of genetically encoded systems (e.g., one or more operons) for detecting and/or constructing biologically active agents. For example, systems may be assembled in order to accomplish one or more goals, e.g. (i) to detect and/or synthesize small molecules that affect the activity of regulatory enzymes (e.g., protein phosphatases, kinases, and/or proteases); (ii) to detect and/or evolve regulatory enzymes modulated by light (e.g., light-responsive protein phosphatases, kinases, or proteases), etc. Small molecule modulators may include inhibitors of phosphatases known to be associated with human diseases or implicated with causing or perpetuating human diseases; activators of phosphatases implicated or known to be associated in human diseases (e.g., diabetes, obesity, and cancer); such small molecules may serve as chemical probes in studies of cell signaling; as structural starting points (i.e., leads); etc., for the development of pharmaceutical compounds for use in treating a human disease. Light-sensitive enzymes may include protein tyrosine phosphatases fused to optogenetic actuators (e.g., a LOV domain if phototropin 1). Such fusions could serve as tools for exerting spatiotemporal control over protein tyrosine phosphorylation in living cells

Further, microbial operons are provided that are designed for use in identifying either small molecule inhibitors, activators, or modulator molecules, photoswitchable enzymes, or biological components, including intracellularly expressed molecules, including, for examples, operons having components for use in whole cell microbial screening assay systems. Inhibitors/modulator molecules discovered using compositions, systems and methods described herein are contemplated for use in treating diseases such as diabetes, type II diabetes, obesity, cancer, and Alzheimer's disease, among other disorders associated with protein phosphatase enzymes.

In one embodiment, the present invention relates to a Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B). PTP1B represents a valuable starting point for this study for four reasons: (i) It is implicated in diabetes5, obesity6, cancer30, anxiety31, inflammation32, the immune response, and neural specification in embryonic stem cells33, (ii) The mechanisms underlying its subcellular localization are well understood (a short C-terminal anchor connects it to the ER; proteolysis of this anchor releases it to the cytosol)2934. (iii) It can be expressed, purified, and assayed with ease35, (iv) It is a member of a class of structurally similar enzymes (PTPs) that could facilitate the rapid extension of architectures for making it photoswitchable. PTP1B represents both an experimentally tractable model system for testing strategies for optical control, and an enzyme for which optical modulation is contemplated to permit detailed analyses of a wide range of diseases and physiological processes.

Specifically related to exemplary Figures: FIGS. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 12, and 13 describe optogenetic and imaging technologies (i.e., light-sensitive enzymes and genetically encodable biosensors) that could be evolved, improved, or optimized with the operon; FIGS. 10 and 11 describe strategies for using the operon to evolve, improve, or optimize light-sensitive enzymes; FIGS. 5, 6, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 28, 29, 30, and 31 support both (i) the development of an operon for detecting and/or evolving small molecules that inhibit known drug targets and (ii) the subsequent characterization of those molecules; FIGS. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, and 32 provide examples of kinetic and biophysical characterizations of a microbially synthesizable molecule that inhibits PTP1B.

### I. Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases (PTPs) and Protein Tyrosine Kinases (PTKs) in Relation to Disease.

Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) are two classes of enzymes contributing to anomalous signaling events in a wide range of diseases (e.g., diabetes, cancer, atherosclerosis, and Alzheimer's disease, among others) and understanding disease progression14,36. Further, they are involved with regulating memory, fear, appetite, energy expenditure, and metabolism, thus use of such phosphorylation regulating enzymes may reveal links between seemingly disparate physiological processes14,22,13.

Embodiments for using light as photoswitchable constructs for controlling PTPs and PTKs is described herein. Accordingly, examples of photoswitchable constructs of PTPs and PTKs developed as described herein, should be broadly useful to biomedical researchers interested in understanding how healthy and diseased cells process chemical signals in addition to use for identifying specific alleles of PTPs and/or PTKs (i.e. gene sequences or proteins)—or other enzymes that they regulate—linked to specific diseases, such as diabetes, etc., including subtypes of diseases, i.e. early onset, late onset, etc., and specific types of cancer, and for screening and testing molecules, including small molecules, for treating diseases associated with these alleles.

Although other references describe photocontrol of proteins, including using LOV2 conjugates, these references do not mention using phosphatases. Fan, et al., “Optical Control Of Biological Processes By Light-Switchable Proteins.” Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 4(5): 545-554. 2015. This reference describes blue light-oxygen-voltage-sensing (LOV) domains including the LOV2 C-terminal α-helix, termed Jα, from Avena sativa phototropin. Linkage to the LOV domain can cage a protein of interest (POI), while light-induced conformational change in the LOV domain results in its uncaging. As one example, peptide kinase inhibitors can be caged by fusion to the C-terminus of LOV2. Exposure to light results in uncaging of the inhibitors for light modulating protein kinase activities in cells. WO2011133493. “Allosteric regulation of kinase activity.” Published Oct. 27, 2011. This reference describes fusion proteins comprising a kinase, including as examples, a tyrosine kinase (Src), a serine/threonine kinase (p38), and a ligand binding domain, e.g. a light-regulated LOV domain (where illumination is considered “ligand binding), inserted in the N-terminal and/or C-terminal end or near the catalytic domain to produce allosteric regulation using a light-dependent kinase. Further, a LOV domain includes a LOV2 domain and/or Ja domain from A. sativa phototropin I. WO2012111772 (A1) In Japanese with an English abstract. This reference abstract describes a polypeptide for the optical control of calcium signaling comprising an amino acid sequence including: a LOV2 domain composed of SEQ ID NO: 1 or an amino acid sequence having at least 80% sequence identity with SEQ ID NO: 1. The construct has a LOV2 domain followed by a LOV2-Jalpha optical switch at the N terminus of the construct. U.S. Pat. No. 8,859,232. “Genetically encoded photomanipulation of protein and peptide activity.” Issued 10-14-2014. This reference describes fusion proteins comprising protein light switches and methods of photomanipulating the activity of the fusion proteins to study protein function and analyze subcellular activity, as well as diagnostic and therapeutic methods. More specifically, a fusion protein comprising a protein of interest fused to a protein light switch comprising a light, oxygen or voltage (LOV2) domain of Avena sativa (oat) phototropin 1, wherein illumination of the fusion protein activates or inactivates the protein of interest. The protein of interest is a functional domain of a human protein. As an example, a LOV2-Jα sequence of phototropin1 (404-547) was fused to the N-terminus of RacI so that the LOV domain in its closed conformation would reversibly block the binding of effectors to RacI.

A. Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases (PTPs).

Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are a class of regulatory enzymes that exhibit aberrant activities in a wide range of diseases. A detailed mapping of allosteric communication in these enzymes could, thus, reveal the structural basis of physiologically relevant—and, perhaps, therapeutically informative—perturbations (i.e., mutations, post-translational modifications, or binding events) that influence their catalytic states. This study combines detailed biophysical studies of protein tyrosine phosphatase IB (PTP IB) with large-scale bioinformatic analyses to examine allosteric communication in PTPs. Results of X-ray crystallography, molecular dynamics simulations, and sequence-based statistical analyses indicate that PTP IB possesses a broadly distributed allosteric network that is evolutionarily conserved across the PTP family, and findings from kinetic studies show that this network is functionally intact in sequence-diverse PTPs. The allosteric network resolved in this study reveals new sites for targeting allosteric inhibitors of PTPs and helps explain the functional influence of a diverse set of disease-associated mutations.

In one embodiment, a tyrosine phosphatase and photosensitive protein as described herein may be attached to a drug for use in medical treatments. In contrast to EP2116263, “Reversibly light-switchable drug-conjugates.” Published Nov. 11, 2009 which does not mention tyrosine phosphatase, and which describes photoswitchable conjugates of protein phosphatase calcineurin attached to a photoisomerizable group B and also attached to a drug for use in medical treatments (neither of these groups are genetically encodable). As one example in EP2116263, tumor growth is suppressed by inhibition of the protein phosphatase calcineurin. A photoisomerizable group B, for near UV (e.g. 370 nm) or near IR (e.g. 740 nm) induced activity, does not include a light responsive plant protein phototropin 1 LOV2 N-terminal alpha helix.

Receptor PTPs are contemplated for conjugation to light sensing proteins, as described herein. In contrast, Karunarathne, et al., “Subcellular optogenetics—controlling signaling and single-cell behavior.” J Cell Sci. 128(1):15-25, 2015, describes photosensitive domains, such as bacteria light-oxygen-voltage-sensing (LOV and LOV2) domains including a C-terminal helical Jα region, tagged to receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), there were no specific examples, there was no mention of a tyrosine phosphatase nor a plant phototropin 1 LOV2 N-terminal alpha helix. Optical activation of an inositol 5-phosphatase was shown, but inositol 5-phosphatase is not a protein phosphatase.

B. Enzymatic Phosphorylation of Tyrosine Residues.

Enzymatic phosphorylation of tyrosine residues has a role in cellular function and is anomalously regulated in an enormous range of diseases (e.g., diabetes, cancer, autoimmune disorders, and Noonan syndrome. It is controlled by the concerted action of two classes of structurally flexible—and dynamically regulatable—enzymes: protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs), which catalyze the ATP-dependent phosphorylation of tyrosine residues, and protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), which catalyze the hydrolytic dephosphorylation of phosphotyrosines (5, 6). A detailed understanding of the mechanisms by which these enzymes respond to activity-modulating structural perturbations (i.e., mutations, post-translational modifications, or binding events) can, thus, illuminate their contributions to various diseases and facilitate the design of new PTK- or PTP-targeted therapeutics.

Over the last several decades, many biophysical studies have dissected the catalytic mechanisms and regulatory functions of PTKs (7, 8), which are common targets of pharmaceuticals.(9) Detailed analyses of PTPs, by contrast, have lagged behind.(10) These enzymes represent an underdeveloped source of biomedical insight and therapeutic potential (no inhibitors of PTPs have cleared clinical trials); they are, thus, the focus of this study.

PTPs uses two loops to dephosphorylate tyrosine residues. The eight-residue P-loop binds phosphate moieties through a positively charged arginine, which enables nucleophilic attack by a nearby cysteine, and the ten-residue WPD loop contains a general acid catalyst—an aspartate—that protonates the tyrosine leaving group and hydrolyzes the phosphoenzyme intermediate—11-13) During catalysis, the P-loop remains fixed, while the WPD loop moves ˜10A between open and closed states; nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analyses suggest this movement controls the rate of catalysis.(14)

Recent analyses of protein tyrosine phosphatase IB (PTP IB) a drug target for the treatment of diabetes, obesity, and breast cancer, indicate that motions of its WPD loop are regulated by an allosteric network that extends to its C-terminus (FIG. 1B) (15, 16). This network is susceptible to modulation by both (i) inhibitors that displace its C-terminal α7 helix (17, 18) and (ii) mutations that disrupt communication between the a(alpha)7 helix and the WPD loop (15); the specific collection of residues that enable allosteric communication in PTP1B and other PTPs has yet to be fully resolved.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B). PTP1B represents a valuable tool for use in identifying potential therapeutics for at least four reasons: (i) It is implicated in diabetes5, obesity6, cancer30, anxiety31, inflammation32, the immune response, and neural specification in embryonic stem cells33, (ii) The mechanisms underlying its subcellular localization are well understood (a short C-terminal anchor connects it to the ER; proteolysis of this anchor releases it to the cytosol)2934. (iii) It can be expressed, purified, and assayed with ease35, (iv) It is a member of a class of structurally similar enzymes (PTPs) that could facilitate the rapid extension of architectures for making it photoswitchable. PTP1B, thus, represents both an experimentally tractable model system for testing strategies for optical control, and an enzyme for which optical modulation will permit detailed analyses of a wide range of diseases and physiological processes.

Spatial regulation and intracellular signaling. PTP1B demonstrates, by example, the value of photoswitchable enzymes for studying spatial regulation in intracellular signaling. It is hypothesized to inactivate receptor tyrosine kinases through (i) contacts between endosomes and the ER37,38, (ii) contacts between the plasma membrane and extended regions of the ER39, and (iii) direct protein-protein interactions enabled by its partial proteolysis and release into the cytosol34. The role of different mechanisms (or locations) of PTP1B-substrate interaction in determining the outcomes of those interactions is poorly understood. Evidence suggesting a relationship between the location of PTP1B and its role in signaling has arisen in studies of tumorigenesis. Inhibition of PTP1B can suppress tumor growth and metastasis in breast30,40, lung3,41, colorectal9, and prostate cancers,42,43 while its upregulation has similar effects in lymphoma3,44. Recent evidence suggest that the former effect may result from inhibition of cytosolic PTP1B45; the cause of the latter is unclear. At present, there are no tools to investigate the differential influence of spatially distinct subpopulations of PTP1B on tumor-associated signaling events within the same cell. Photoswitchable variants of PTP1B represent such a tool.

Network biology. Signaling networks are often represented as nodes (proteins) connected by lines (interactions)46. Such maps capture the connectivity of biochemical relay systems, but obscure spatial context—the ability of a single interaction to occur in multiple locations and, perhaps, to stimulate multiple signaling outcomes. This study develops a set of tools that will enable detailed studies of the role of spatial context in guiding the propagation of signals through biochemical networks; such an examination contributes to understanding the role of PTP1B in cell signaling (and processes associated with tumorigenesis), and generally relevant to the study of any enzyme that exists in spatially distinct subpopulations within the cell.

### II. Optogenetic Actuators.

Optogenetic actuators (genetically encodable proteins that undergo light-induced changes in conformation) provide a convenient means of placing biochemical events under optical control. Alone, or when fused to other proteins, they have enabled optical manipulation of biomolecular transport, binding, and catalysis with millisecond and submicron resolution in living cells. Our approach addresses two major deficiencies in existing technologies: Observational interference and illuminating half the story. Existing strategies to control the activity of enzymes with light interfere with native patterns of protein production, localization, and interaction (often by design) and, thus, make direct interrogation and/or control of those patterns—which determine how biochemical signals are processed—difficult. There are several methods to control protein kinases with light, but no analogous methods for controlling protein phosphatases. As signaling networks are regulated by the concerted action of both classes of enzyme, comprehensive control and/or detailed dissections of those networks require methods for controlling both.

Embodiments described herein comprise (i) an approach for controlling the activity of proteins with light without disrupting their wild-type activities and (ii) a demonstration of this approach on a protein of particular importance: protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), a regulator of cell signaling and a validated drug target for the treatment of diabetes, obesity, and cancer. There are no known photoswitchable protein tyrosine phosphatases. The PTP1B-LOV2 construct reported in this filing is the first. (ii) The N-terminal alpha helix of LOV2 is ignored in most studies (even reviews of optical switches) and has not been used as an exclusive connection point for optical modulation of enzymes.

We have developed a photoswitchable version of PTP1B by fusing the C-terminal allosteric domain of this enzyme to the N-terminal alpha helix of a protein light switch (i.e., the LOV2 domain of phototropin 1 from Avena sativa). We present evidence that this general architecture—which is unique in the placement of LOV2 away from the active site of PTP1B (minimally disruptive)—can be extended to other PTPs and, perhaps, PTKs. For example, we used a statistical coupling analysis to show that the allosteric network exploited in our PTP1B design is preserved across the PTP family.

Alone, or when fused to other proteins, optogenetic actuators have enabled optical manipulation of biomolecular transport, binding, and catalysis with millisecond and submicron resolution15,16. At least three deficiencies limit their use in detailed studies of signaling networks: Observational interference. Existing strategies to control the activity of enzymes with light interfere with native patterns of protein production, localization, and interaction16,17 (often by design) and, thus, make direct interrogation of those patterns—which determine how biochemical signals are processed10 difficult. Illuminating half the story. There are several methods to control protein kinases with light18,19, but no analogous methods for controlling protein phosphatases. As signaling networks are regulated by the concerted action of both classes of enzyme, detailed dissections of those networks require methods for controlling both. A limited palette of actuators. Optogenetic actuators that enable subcellular control of enzyme activity require the use of blue or green light15. These wavelengths exhibit significant phototoxicity20, suffer from short biological penetration depths21, and, as a result of their spectral similarity, limit actuation to individual signaling events, rather than multiple events simultaneously.

A. Photoswitchable Constructs: Advantages Over Other Exemplary Technologies.

As described herein, a photoswitch describes a protein-protein architecture (e.g., a PTP1B-LOV2 fusion) that is optically active in its monomeric form. A reference, WO2013016693. “Near-infrared light-activated proteins.” Publication Date Jan. 31, 2013, relies on homodimerization. In contrast, optical control as described herein is over a larger range of proteins, including both those that require homodimerization and those that do not, unlike in WO2013016693. Further, this reference describes types of photosensory modules including blue light-sensitive flavoproteins found in plants; photoreceptors of blue-light using flavin adenine dinucleotide (BLUF); Light, Oxygen, or Voltage sensing (LOV) types, which includes plant and bacterial photoreceptors; and plant/microbe phytochromes, sensitive to light, i.e. light-induced helix rotation in the red-to-NIR region. More specifically described with examples are bacteriophytochrome (Bph)-based photoactivated fusion proteins, using light-responsive alpha helixes from Rhodobacter sphaeroides (BphG) fused to proteins such as protein phosphatases, protein kinases, membrane receptors, etc. E. coli, are modified so as to exhibit the level of photoactivity of these expressed fusion proteins, i.e. in the presence or absence of red-to-NIR light. Although blue color changes in E. coli expressing fusion proteins are described in response to light, these blue bacteria are the result of using far-red/NIR-light for photoactivating a fusion protein that in turn activates lacZ expression in the presence of XgaI, not a photoresponse to exposure to blue light. However, there is no specific mention of a tyrosine phosphatase or a plant phototropin 1 LOV2 N-terminal alpha helix. In fact, reviews on optogenetics tend to depict LOV2 as having one terminal helix: The C-terminal Jalpha helix. While there are studies/patents indicating that simple insertion of the LOV2 domain enables photocontrol they rely on the underlying assumption that the Jalpha helix is undwinding to produce the controlling effect, not the A alpha helix as described herein.

B. A “Cage-Free” Approach to Control Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases and Protein Tyrosine Kinases with Light.

Current strategies for using light to control the activity of enzymes (as opposed to their concentration or location) rely on cage-based systems: a light-responsive protein, when fused to an enzyme of interest, controls access to its active site16,47. Unfortunately, such architectures can alter the affinity of enzymes for binding partners and change their susceptibility to activity modulating modifications (e.g., phosphorylation)16,18. These effects complicate the use of optogenetics to study signaling. This study will develop a “cage-free”, allostery-based approach for optical control that minimizes interference between enzymes and their substrates (and other binding partners). This approach will help preserve native patterns of protein localization, interaction, and post-translational modification and, thus, facilitate studies of the influence of those patterns on intracellular signaling.

2. A genetically encoded photoswitchable phosphatase. There are no genetically encodable photoswitchable phosphatases; the chimeras developed in this proposal will be the first. Photoswitchable variants of PTP1B will enable detailed studies of a wide range of interesting PTP1 B-regulated processes (e.g., insulin, endocannabinoid, and epidermal growth factor signaling49,51, and cell adhesion and migration52). Photoswitchable phosphatases, in general, will provide a useful class of tools for studying cell biology (particularly in concert with photoswitchable kinases, which could enable complementation experiments).

Hypothesis: The catalytic domains of PTPs and PTKs possess C-terminal a-helices that are distal to their active sites, yet capable of modulating their catalytic activities (for at least a subset of enzymes—the generality of this function is not known)23,24. We hypothesize that the fusion of this helix to the N-terminal α-helix of the light-oxygen voltage 2 (LOV2) domain of phototropin 1 from Avena sativa—a photosensory domain with terminal helices that unwind in response to blue light2526—will yield enzyme-LOV2 chimeras that exhibit light-dependent catalytic activities, yet retain their native substrate specificities and binding affinities.

Experimental approach: We will attach the C-terminal α-helix of PTP1B to the N-terminal α-helix of LOV2 at homologous crossover points, and we will assess the influence of photoactivation on the catalytic activity of the resulting chimeras. This effort will involve the use of (i) kinetic assays and binding studies to characterize the substrate specificities and binding affinities of photoswitchable constructs and (ii) crystallographic and spectroscopic analyses to examine the structural basis of photocontrol. Informed by these studies, we will extend our approach to striatal-enriched protein tyrosine phosphatase (STEP) and protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6), enzymes implicated in Alzheimer's disease and triple-negative breast cancer, respectively.

We will combine sophisticated biophysical studies, synthetic biology, and fluorescence microscopy to (i) develop protein architectures that enable optical control of protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) without interfering with their wild-type activities or binding specificities, (ii) evolve PTPs and PTKs modulated by red light, and (iii) develop an imaging methodology to study spatially localized signaling events in living cells.

We will begin our study with PTP1B, a validated drug target for the treatment of diabetes, obesity, and breast cancer, and an enzyme for which optogenetic tools will be particularly useful to address current gaps in knowledge (e.g., the role of spatially distinct subpopulations of PTP1B in promoting or suppressing the growth of tumors22). Using it as a model, we will establish the generality of our methods by extending them to other PTPs and PTKs.

C. A Photoswitchable Variant of PTP1B.

Our first objective seeks to use LOV2, a protein with terminal helices that unwind in response to blue light, to control the activity of PTP1B, an enzyme for which unwinding of the C-terminal α-helix disrupts activity by distorting its catalytically essential WPD loop (FIG. 1AB, FIG. 6). To assess the feasibility of this goal, we constructed five PTP1B-LOV2 chimeras (joined at homologous crossover points): three chimeras showed light-dependent catalytic activity on 4-methylumbelliferyl phosphate (4M) (FIG. 1G). A subsequent mutational analysis of one chimera indicated that mutations in the α-helix that links PTP1B to LOV2 can improve catalytic activity and dynamic range (DR, the ratio of dark/light activities; FIG. 1G). Our ability to build—and begin optimizing—a photoswitchable PTP1B-LOV2 chimera by screening a small number of constructs suggests that rational design will allow us to build a chimera sufficient for intracellular signaling studies. We note: Our most photoswitchable chimera has a DR of 2.2; previous imaging studies suggest that a DR of 3-10 is sufficient to control intracellular signaling218,19.

More specifically, FIG. 1C demonstrates some of differences over other types of optical control. The y-axis of the top plot indicates the activity of each construct in the dark (i.e., the initial rate of PTP1B-catalyzed hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl phosphate); the y-axis of the bottom plot indicates the ratio of activity in dark and light state (i.e., the initial rate in the dark/the initial rate in the presence of 455 nm light), i.e. dynamic range.

Black bars show the activity and dynamic range for a set of eight initial constructs that differ in the crossover point (see the bottom of FIG. 1B). Some of these constructs are photoswitchable, and some are not. Version 7 shows the greatest photoswitchability—the dynamic range is approximately 1.8.

More specifically, colors are associated with different types of constructs. Black: different crossover point (see FIG. 1B for crossover points); Gray: different partitioning of the linker (see, Linker section below); Light blue: the Jalpha helix—this is at the C-terminus of the LOV2 domain; Dark blue: the A′alpha helix—this is at the N-terminus of the LOV2 domain and, thus, on the region that links it to PTP1B; Yellow: the alpha7 helix of PTP1B—this is at the C-terminus of PTP1B and, thus, on the region that links PTP1B to LOV2; Orange: combination: a combination of sites from the previous colors, see below for additional information.

These results were surprising, in part, because a recent review on optogenetics shows that that photocontrol of activity requires the Jα helix of LOV2, where Jα is a C-terminal helix which resides in a folded state against the LOV domain core, to be attached to a protein of interest, see Repina, N. A., Rosenbloom, A., Mukherjee, A., Schaffer, D. V. & Kane, R. S. At Light Speed: Advances in Optogenetic Systems for Regulating Cell Signaling and Behavior. Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng. 8, 13-39 (2017). Photoactivation with blue light converts the noncovalent interaction between the LOV core and its bound flavin chromophore, FMN, into a covalent one through a conserved cysteine residue. The accompanying light-induced conformational change displaces the Jα helix away from the protein core, leading to uncaging of a fused effector domain (e.g., the kinase domain of phot1). Jα helix reverts to its dark-state caged conformation within minutes owing to spontaneous decay of the protein-cofactor bond.

Several limitations of the native AsLOV2 domain have motivated efforts to engineer improved variants. First, when fused to foreign protein domains, spontaneous undocking of the Jα helix can lead to a relatively high dark-state activity, resulting in a low dynamic range upon AsLOV2 uncaging (26). For example, the light-inducible DNA-binding system LovTAP has only a fivefold change in DNA affinity between the dark and illuminated states (27). To address this issue, Strickland et al. (26) used rational design to introduce four mutations into AsLOV2 that stabilized the docking of Jα to the LOV core. This increased the dynamic range of LovTAP from 5-fold to 70-fold, an approach that can be applied to other LOV domain optogenetic systems to reduce dark-state activity. AsLOV2 fusions are also particularly sensitive to linker lengths and the size and structure of attached domains (28, 29), and as a result, each new fusion protein switch requires optimization to achieve low dark-state and high light-state activity in mammalian cells.

In contrast to the Jα helix-protein chimers, as shown herein, the A′α helix not the Jα helix is attached to the protein of interest to form photoswitchable constructs, e.g. PTPB1.

Exemplary Linkers.

Gray bars of FIG. 1C show the activity and dynamic range of mutants of version 7 in which the linker has been re-partitioned. In other words, version 7 has the following linker region: LSHEDLATTL (SEQ ID NO: 5), where the underlined region “LSHED” (SEQ ID NO: 6) corresponds to the C-terminus of PTP1B, and the region “LATTL” (SEQ ID NO: 7) corresponds to the N-terminus of LOV2. Version 7.1 has sequence LSHEDATTL (SEQ ID NO: 8); version 7.2 has sequence LSHEDTTL (SEQ ID NO: 9), and so on. Here, we find that version 7.1 has the same dynamic range as version 7, but a higher activity. We, thus, used version 7.1 for further optimization.

Exemplary Mutations.

Light blue bars show the activity and dynamic range of mutants of version 7.1 in which the Jα helix contains helix-stabilizing mutations. Curiously, these improve the activity of 7.1, but do not improve its dynamic range.

Dark blue bars show the activity and dynamic range for mutants of version 7.1 in which the A′α helix contains helix-stabilizing mutations. One of these mutations (T406A) improves dynamic range; we used this version for further studies.

Yellow bars show the activity and dynamic range of mutants of version 7.1 in which the α7 of PTP1B has helix-stabilizing mutations; the orange bars show the activity and dynamic range for mutants of version 7.1 in which the multiple mutations are combined. Neither of the constructs associated with yellow and orange bars show improved characteristics of 7.1 (T406A).

A minimally disruptive approach. Two kinetic studies indicate that our architecture for photocontrol does not interfere with the native substrate specificity or binding behavior of PTP1B: (i) An analysis of the activity of chimera E3 (from FIG. 1D) on p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pN) indicates that light affects kcat, but not Km (FIGS. 2K and L). (ii) An analysis of activities on three substrates of different sizes (4M, pN, and a peptide) shows that DR is the same for all three (FIG. 2L-K). The results of both studies are consistent with our hypothesized mechanism of photocontrol: LOV2-induced unwinding of the C-terminal α-helix of PTP1B disrupts the movement of its catalytically essential WPD loop, which controls the rate of catalysis, but has little influence on substrate binding affinity.

Biophysical studies. Photoswitchable chimeras express at titers (−100 mg/L) sufficient to carry out detailed biophysical analyses. We performed a preliminary set of these analyses on chimera E3. (i) We use circular dichroism (CD) to examine the influence of photoactivation on its secondary structure; spectral measurements indicate that photoactivation reduces α-helical content (222 nm; FIG. 2B). (ii) We used the amplitude at 222 nm to measure a post-activation recovery time for α-helical content: Tr−30 s (FIG. 2E). This value is similar to the recovery times of previously developed LOV2-based photoswitchable constructs, (iii) We used tryptophan fluorescence to measure a post-activation recovery time of tryptophan residues: Tr-50 s (FIG. 2F). Tryptophan fluorescence is a rough metric for the conformation of PTP1B (which has seven tryptophan residues, compared to one in LOV2); this slower recovery time, thus, suggests that PTP1B takes longer than LOV2 to refold, (iv) We identified a set of crystallization conditions (those previously used to crystallize PTP1 BW) to grow crystals of E3 (FIG. 2F). (V) We collected a two-dimensional 1H-15N HSQC spectrum of PTP1BW, and assigned −65% of non-proline peaks. These NMR experiments, which are recent, have yet to include PTP1B-LOV2 chimeras; but the ease with which we carried them out (a single try) suggests that similar analyses of chimeras will be straightforward. The experimental tractability of PTP1B-LOV2 chimeras will enable a comprehensive biophysical analysis of variants with different photophysical properties.

Example 1. To develop a “cage-free” approach to control protein tyrosine phosphatases and kinases with light. This section develops an approach for placing enzymes under optical control without disrupting their native interactions. We will demonstrate this approach with PTP1B and, then, extend it to STEP and PTK6. We will know that we are successful when we have a PTP1B-LOV2 chimera that exhibits a three- to ten-fold change in activity between light and dark states, and when we have identified structure-based design rules that facilitate fine-tuning of the photophysical properties of photoswitchable variants of PTP1B, STEP, and PTK6.

D. Development of a Photoswitchable Variant of PTP1B.

The efforts in this section assume—and with crystallographic, kinetic, and binding studies, attempt to confirm—that optogenetic actuation systems located far from active sites are less likely to disrupt wild-type behaviors that actuation systems located nearby. Kinetic studies of preliminary PTP1B-LOV2 chimeras (i.e., chimeras in which the C-terminal helix of PTP1B is connected to the N-terminal helix of the LOV2 domain of phototropin 1 from A vena sativa) support this hypothesis: light inhibits their activity by affecting kcat, not Km, and they show wild-type kinetics on 4-methylumbelliferyl phosphate (4M), a model substrate (FIG. 1G and FIG. 2K). Photomodulation of kcat, but not Km suggests that LOV2 exploits an allosteric network to distort the WPD loop (FIG. 6).

Our initial constructs, which represent the first reported examples photoswitchable protein phosphatases, will facilitate a systematic study of the functional advantages of different chimera architectures. We are particularly interested in understanding how (i) the length of the linker that connects PTP1B and LOV2 and (ii) the stability of the terminal helices of LOV2 affect catalytic activity and dynamic range. We will study these relationships by combing spectroscopic analyses with kinetic studies. Spectroscopic analyses will show how different PTP1B-LOV2 chimeras rearrange under illumination (e.g., we will use CD and fluorescence spectroscopy to measure photomodulation of α-helical content and tryptophan fluorescence), and kinetic studies will reveal the influence of those rearrangements on catalytic activity and dynamic range.

The results of our biophysical analyses will facilitate the optimization of our chimera for in vitro cell studies. We will target a chimera—hereafter, referred to as PTP1BPS—with the following properties: a dynamic range (DR) of 3-10, a recovery time of Tr˜15-60 s, and wild-type activity (in its activated state). Previous optogenetic studies suggest that these attributes enable optical control of cell signaling2,18,19. We note: Biophysical studies of PTP1B indicate that the removal of its C-terminal α-helix can reduce its activity by a factor of four57; accordingly, we believe that LOV2 can modulate the activity of PTP1B by at least fourfold (of course, LOV2 may trigger structural distortions more pronounced than those of a simple truncation).

E. Characterization of PTP1B-Substrate and PTP1B-Protein Interactions.

We will assess the influence of LOV2 on the substrate specificity of PTP1B by using kinetic analyses. Specifically, we will compare the activities of PTP1BWand PTP1BPS on three substrates: (i) p-nitrophenyl phosphate, a general substrate for tyrosine phosphatases, (ii) ETGTEEpYMKMDLG (SEQ ID NO: 10), a substrate of PTPs closely related to PTP1B, and (iii) RRLIEDAEpYAARG (SEQ ID NO: 11), a substrate specific to PTP1B. A comparison of values of kcat and Km on these substrates (FIG. 2K shows an example kinetic study) will reveal differences in the catalytic activities and specificities of PTP1BWand PTP1BPS. These studies will also allow us to assess the substrate-dependence of photoswitchability (i.e., DR). Photomodulation is often assumed to be independent of substrate; there is, however, no biochemical basis for this assumption (particularly in cage-based systems, where substrates may bind with different affinities and, thus, have different abilities to compete with the caging protein). We will test it.

We will assess the ability of PTP1BPS to engage in the same protein-protein interactions as PTP1BWby measuring the affinity of both enzymes for two native binding partners of PTP1BWT: LMO4 and Stat3. Binding isotherms based on changes in tryptophan fluorescence of PTP1B will facilitate this study (FIG. 7).

Our biochemical comparison of PTP1BWT and PTP1BPS may seem tedious, but we believe that this analysis is necessary to establish the relevance of future optogenetic observations to wild-type processes.

Biostructural characterization. We will investigate the structural basis of photocontrol in PTP1BPS by using X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy. X-ray crystal structures will show how LOV2 affects the structure of PTP1B (and vice versa); NMR spectroscopy will show how LOV2 modulates catalytic activity. For crystallographic studies, we will crystallize PTP1BPS in its dark state (we will use the C450S mutation, which prevents formation of the cysteine adduct2,26) by screening crystallization conditions previously used for LOV2, PTP1B, and LOV2-protein chimeras (all of which have crystal structures2,35,58); preliminary results suggest that those used to grow crystals of PTP1BWalso yield crystals of PTP1B-LOV2 chimeras (FIG. 2J). For NMR studies, we will use heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC) spectroscopy and transverse relaxation-optimized spectroscopy (TROSY) to monitor changes in the conformation and backboned dynamics of PTP1BPS before and after illumination. (We note: Backbone 1H, 13C, and 15N chemical shifts have been assigned for PTP1B and LOV259,60).

G. Exemplary Imaging Methodology to Study Subcellular Signaling Events in Living Cells.

This section uses PTP1BPS (a PTP1B-LOV2 chimera) to develop an approach for using confocal microscopy to probe—and study—subcellular signaling events. We will know that this objective is successful when we can inactivate a within subcellular regions, monitor the effect of that inactivation with an FRET-based sensor, and isolate the contributions of different subpopulations of PTP1B (e.g., ER-bound and cytosolic) to sensor phosphorylation.

Hypothesis. The subcellular localization of PTPs and PTKs is controlled by domains proximal to their catalytic cores23,24. We hypothesize that the attachment of these domains to photoswitchable chimeras will give them wild-type localization patterns, and enable the use of confocal microscopy to study the contribution of spatially distinct subpopulations of PTPs and PTKs to cell signaling. Experimental approach: Within the cell, PTP1B exists in two spatially distinct subpopulations: attached to the cytosolic face of the endoplasmic reticulum, and free in the cytosol—a result of proteolysis of its short (−80 residue) C-terminal ER anchor29. We will (i) attach the ER anchor of wild-type PTP1B (PTP1 BW) to our PTP1B-LOV2 chimera, (ii) compare the subcellular localization of the resulting chimera with that of PTP1BW, (iii) use confocal microscopy—in conjunction with a FRET-based sensor for phosphatase activity—to control and monitor PTP1B activity within the cell, and (iv) develop a reaction-diffusion model to assess the contributions of spatially distinct subpopulations of PTP1B to changes in sensor phosphorylation over time and space. This work will yield a general approach for studying spatially localized signaling events in living cells.

Localization of PTP1BPS.

To examine the localization of PTP1BPS in living cells, we will express three variants in COS-7 cells: (i) PTP1BPS_C45os, (ii) PTP1BPS_c45os attached to a short segment (−20 amino acids29) of the C-terminal ER anchor of PTP1BWthat contains only the transmembrane domain (but not the proteolysis site), and (iii) PTP1 BPS-c45os attached to the full C-terminal ER anchor of PTP1BW(˜80 amino acids29). We hypothesize that these constructs will have (i) cytosolic, (ii) ER-bound, and (iii) both cytosolic and ER-bound (i.e., wild-type) localization patterns, respectively. Using confocal microscopy, we will test this hypothesis by using the fluorescence of LOV2 to locate each chimera70. (In these studies, we will locate the ER with fluorescently-labeled SEC61B, an ER-associated transport complex71. The C450S mutation, which locks LOV2 in its fluorescent state, will prevent photoactivation during imaging).

COS-7 cells, fibroblast-like cells derived from the kidney tissue of the African green monkey, are particularly compatible with the aforementioned analysis for three reasons: (i) They are large and flat and, thus, facilitate imaging of spatially segregated subcellular regions72, (ii) They are compatible with commercially available transfection reagents73, (iii) Methods for inducing endocytosis71 and calpain expression74, two processes that influence the subcellular activity and localization of PTP1B, are well developed for these cells.

Control of PTP1BPS in living cells. We will examine the activity of PTP1B within subcellular regions by pairing confocal microscopy with a FRET-based sensor for protein phosphorylation (developed by the Umezawa group54; FIG. 12). This sensor will consist of a kinase substrate domain, a short flexible linker, and a phosphorylation recognition domain—all sandwiched between two fluorescent proteins (Clover, a green fluorescent protein, and mRuby2, a red fluorescent protein). Phosphorylation of the substrate domain will cause it to bind to the recognition domain, modulating (i.e., enhancing or reducing) FRET between the two fluorescent proteins. Our preliminary sensor, which uses substrate and SH2 domains compatible with PTP1B and src23,55, exhibits a 20% change in FRET in response to phosphorylation. We will attempt to optimize our sensor further by screening different substrate domains, SH2 domains, and linker lengths. Ouyang et al. built a FRET sensor for Src kinase activity that exhibits a −120% change in FRET when phosphorylated55; we will use the architecture of this sensor—or, perhaps the sensor itself—to inform our designs.

In our imaging experiments, we will use a 455-nm laser to inactivate PTP1B within subcellular regions (1-10 urn circles) and fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) to monitor changes in sensor phosphorylation that result from that inactivation (FIG. 13). For these experiments, we will use siRNA to deplete PTP1 BWand SEC61B to label the ER. The output will be a series of images in which the intensity of a pixel is proportional to the fluorescence lifetime of Clover (and, thus, the extent of sensor phosphorylation).

With this study, we are particularly interested in examining relationships between (i) the location of PTPIBps activation/inactivation, (ii) the size of the region of activation/inactivation, and (iii) the location and timing of changes in the phosphorylation state of the sensor. We will investigate these relationships by using a reaction-diffusion model. Equation 1 provides a simple example of a governing equation:

\(\begin{matrix}
{\frac{\partial{S_{P}\left( {r,t} \right)}}{\partial t} = {{D_{S}{\nabla^{2}S_{P}}} + {k_{cat}^{K}\lbrack{KS}\rbrack} - {k_{cat}^{P}\left\lbrack {PS}_{P} \right\rbrack} - {{k_{on}^{K}\lbrack P\rbrack}\left\lbrack S_{P} \right\rbrack}}} & \left( {{Eq}.\mspace{14mu} 1} \right)
\end{matrix}\)

for the phosphorylated sensor (SP). Here, Ds is the diffusion coefficient for the sensor; KS is the concentration of tyrosine kinase bound to unphosphorylated sensor; PSp is the concentration of PTP1B bound to phosphorylated sensor; P and Sp are the concentrations of free PTP1B and free phosphorylated sensor, respectively; k{circumflex over ( )}at and k{circumflex over ( )}at are the catalytic constants for the tyrosine kinase and PTP1B, respectively; and k %n is the kinetic constant for sensor-PTP1B association. The kinase and phosphatase are assumed to bind only weakly with their products (an assumption that can be easily re-examined later). We may also supplement this model with tools such as BioNetGen, a web-based platform for generating biochemical reaction networks from user-specified rules for the mechanisms and locations of biomolecular interactions75; such a tool, which can accommodate cellular heterogeneity (e.g., organelles and other compartments), will help to support and expand our kinetic model.

We hypothesize that a version of our kinetic model in which the phosphatase diffuses freely will more accurately capture the phosphorylation state of the sensor (at a specified time and position from the irradiation region) in the presence of cytosolic PTP1BPS. By contrast, a version of the model in which phosphatase does not diffuse freely will more accurately capture the behavior of sensors in the presence of ER-bound PTP1BPS. Regression of either model against imaging data will enable estimation of the extent to which cytosolic and ER-bound PTP1B contribute to changes in sensor phosphorylation over time and space.

Image analysis. The ER exists as a vesicular network that is spread throughout the cell; inactivation of subcellular regions that are entirely ER or entirely cytosol is difficult. To enable analysis of spatially distinct subpopulations of PTP1B, we must, thus, estimate the amount of ER in different regions of irradiation. The discrepancy in length scales of ER heterogeneity (−20-100 pm) and irradiation (−1-10 pm) will permit such an estimation. We will work with two metrics: (i) the total fluorescence of labeled ER, and (ii) the anisotropy of labeled ER. Both metrics, by facilitating estimates of the populations of cytosolic and ER-bound PTP1B in an illuminated region, will help us to assess the contributions of those populations to changes in sensor phosphorylation.

Spatial Regulation and Intracellular Signaling.

PTP1B demonstrates, by example, the value of photoswitchable enzymes for studying spatial regulation in intracellular signaling. It is hypothesized to inactivate receptor tyrosine kinases through (i) contacts between endosomes and the ER37,38, (ii) contacts between the plasma membrane and extended regions of the ER39, and (iii) direct protein-protein interactions enabled by its partial proteolysis and release into the cytosol34. The role of different mechanisms (or locations) of PTP1B-substrate interaction in determining the outcomes of those interactions is poorly understood. Evidence suggesting a relationship between the location of PTP1B and its role in signaling has arisen in studies of tumorigenesis. Inhibition of PTP1B can suppress tumor growth and metastasis in breast30,40, lung3,41, colorectal9, and prostate cancers,42,43 while its upregulation has similar effects in lymphoma3,44. Recent evidence suggests that the former effect may result from inhibition of cytosolic PTP1B45; the cause of the latter is unclear. At present, there are no tools to investigate the differential influence of spatially distinct subpopulations of PTP1B on tumor-associated signaling events within the same cell. Photoswitchable variants of PTP1B represent such a tool.

Network biology. Signaling networks are often represented as nodes (proteins) connected by lines (interactions)46. Such maps capture the connectivity of biochemical relay systems, but obscure spatial context—the ability of a single interaction to occur in multiple locations and, perhaps, to stimulate multiple signaling outcomes. This study develops a set of tools that will enable detailed studies of the role of spatial context in guiding the propagation of signals through biochemical networks; e.g. understanding the role of PTP1B in cell signaling (and processes associated with tumorigenesis), and generally relevant to the study of any enzyme that exists in spatially distinct subpopulations within the cells.

Generalization of Approach to Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases and Kinases.

Two observations suggest that our architecture for photocontrol (i.e., attachment of the N-terminus of LOV2 to the C-terminal α-helix of an enzyme) is broadly applicable to PTPs and PTKs. (i) Structural alignments show that all PTPs possess, or, with a few mutations, can possess—the same allosteric communication network as PTP1B (FIG. 8A)23. (ii) PTKs contain a C-terminal α-helix that is distal to their active sites, yet capable of modulating their catalytic activities (FIG. 8B)61.

We will assess the generalizability of our approach by building photoswitchable variants of striatal-enriched protein tyrosine phosphatase (STEP) and protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6; FIG. 8A). STEP is a neuron-specific phosphatase that is overactive in several neurological disorders, prominently Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, and drug addiction62,63. PTK6, which may function orthogonally to PTP1B in some signaling pathways, is expressed in approximately 70% of triple-negative breast cancers and promotes metastasis50,64. Photoswitchable variants of STEP and PTK6, both of which exist in multiple spatially distinct subpopulations within cells50,62, will enable detailed studies of their intracellular signaling roles, which remain poorly characterized.

For STEP and PTK6, we will develop—and measure the substrate specificities of—photoswitchable chimeras by using several kinetic assays. For STEP, we will use assays analogous to those employed with PTP1B. For PTK6, we will use the ADP-Glo kit developed by Promega, Inc.65. This assay, which is compatible with any peptide substrate, converts ADP produced by PTK-catalyzed peptide phosphorylation to a luminescent signal. For both enzymes, we will collect crystal structures of optimal chimeras.

Exemplary photoswitch construct sequences for use in expressing in mammalian cells or within an operon for microbial cells. In some embodiments, the sequences may be optimized for microbial expression.

FRET sensors. Forster resonance energy transfer (FRET) is contemplated for use to monitor the activity of PTP1B in living cells. Sensor exhibits a 20% reduction in FRET signal when treated with Src kinase (FIG. 21B). Previous imaging studies indicate that a 20% change in FRET is sufficient to monitor intracellular kinase activity54-56. To enhance spatial resolution in imaging studies, we will attempt to optimize our sensor further (and use it to measure the activity of PTP1B in vitro).

Exemplary FRET sensors: underlined -Linker-Bold Substrate—underlined and Bold .

Exemplary Mammalian expression vector(s) for expressing a photoswitch construct in a mammalian cell.

For insertion into a mammalian expression vector, e.g. lentiviral vector, pAcGFP1-C1 (Clontech); PTP1B-LOV2 (above), a promoter, e.g. CMV: GCAAATGGGCGGTAGGCGTGTACGGTGGGAGGTCTATATAAGCAGAGCTGGTTTAG TGAACCGTCAGATC (SEQ ID NO: 22); a RBS, e.g. Kozak consensus translation initiation site: GCCACCATG; an Intergenic spacer (e.g. P2A: DNA sequence: GGCAGCGGCGCCACCAACTTCTCCCTGCTGAAGCAGGCCGGCGACGTGGAGGAGAA CCCCGGCCCC (SEQ ID NO: 23); a protein sequence: GSGATNFSLLKQAGDVEENPGP (SEQ ID NO: 24), etc.

An exemplary FRET Sensor included: a Promoter: Same as above; a RBS: Same as above, etc.

Exemplary FRET sensors are contemplated to avoid overlap between the excitation/emission wavelengths of LOV2 (455/495, we note that LOV2 is only weakly fluorescent70) and our FRET pair (505/515 for Clover and 560/605 for mRuby2), while we still expect to see some crosstalk during imaging, previous three-color imaging studies71 suggest that it will not interfere with our ability to carry out the experiments described in this section.

Contemplative Embodiments Include but at not Limited to Invadopodia Formation and EGFR Regulation.

A photoswitchable variant of PTP1B is contemplated to determine if cytosolic PTP1B, released from the ER by proteolysis, is exclusively responsible for regulating the formation of invadopodia, or if ER-bound PTP1B can function similarly. Cancer cell invasion and metastasis is facilitated by the formation of invadopodia, actin-rich protrusions that enable matrix degradation45.

Both PTP1B and PTK6 regulate epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a regulator of cell proliferation and migration that exhibits aberrant activity in numerous cancers and inflammatory diseases51,76. We will use a variant of PTP1B stimulated by red light and a variant of PTK6 stimulated by blue light (or vice versa) to carry out a combinatorial analysis of the cooperative contribution of PTP1B and PTK6 to EGFR regulation within different regions of the cell.

### III. Genetically Encoded System for Constructing and Detecting Biologically Active Agents: Microbial Inhibitor Screening Systems.

Several types of operons were developed as described herein, each for a specific purpose, including but not limited to testing small molecules for their ability to inhibit, activate, or otherwise modulate a chosen PTP and/or PTK; operons for testing intracellularly provided small molecules for inhibiting, activating, or modulating effects on a chosen PTP and/or PTK; and evolving one or more proteins or small molecules of interest. More specifically, genetic operons were contemplated for insertion, using transfection and breeding techniques well known in the art, for providing microbial cells wherein the activity of an enzyme of interest (e.g., protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B, a drug target for the treatment of diabetes, obesity, and cancer) is linked to (i) cellular luminescence, (ii) cellular fluorescence, or (iii) cellular growth. In some embodiments, such operons are modified for use in detecting and/or evolving biologically active metabolites. When modified and/or induced to build various metabolites, the cell will be used for detection of metabolites that inhibit/activate a protein of interest (e.g., PTP1B).

These operons allow operon-containing microbial cells to be used to carry out the following tasks: Detecting biologically active molecules and non-native biologically active metabolites. When grown in the presence of biologically active molecules as a small molecule that is both (i) cell permeable and (ii) capable of inhibiting a protein of interest (e.g., PTP1B), the cell will enable detection of that molecule. That is, it will exhibit a concentration-dependent response in luminescence, fluorescence, or growth. Many non-native biologically active metabolites have useful pharmaceutical properties. Examples include paclitaxel and artemisinin, plant-derived terpenoids that are used to treat cancer and malaria, respectively. When the metabolic pathways responsible for making such natural metabolites are installed into microbial cells that also contain our operon, those cells will enable detection of interesting metabolite-based biological activities (e.g., the ability to inhibit PTP1B).

Genetic operons that, when installed into microbial cells, link the activity of an enzyme of interest (e.g., protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B, a drug target for the treatment of diabetes, obesity, and cancer) to (i) cellular luminescence, (ii) cellular fluorescence, or (iii) cellular growth.

Detect and/or evolve biologically active metabolites. When modified and/or induced to build various metabolites, the cell will enable detection of metabolites that inhibit/activate a protein of interest (e.g., PTP1B).

These operons allow operon-containing microbial cells to be used to carry out the following tasks: Detecting biologically active molecules and non-native biologically active metabolites. When grown in the presence of a biologically active molecules as a small molecule that is both (i) cell permeable and (ii) capable of inhibiting a protein of interest (e.g., PTP1B), the cell will enable detection of that molecule. That is, it will exhibit a concentration-dependent response in luminescence, fluorescence, or growth. Many non-native biologically active metabolites have useful pharmaceutical properties. Examples include paclitaxel and artemisinin, plant-derived terpenoids that are used to treat cancer and malaria, respectively. When the metabolic pathways responsible for making such natural metabolites are installed into microbial cells that also contain our operon, those cells will enable detection of metabolite-based biological activities (e.g., the ability to inhibit PTP1B).

In some embodiments, methods of evolving molecules may be modified from Moses, et al., “Bioengineering of plant (tri)terpenoids: from metabolic engineering of plants to synthetic biology in vivo and in vitro.” New Phytologist, Volume 200, Issue 1, where this reference describes synthesis of artemisinic acid, the precursor of the antimalarial drug artemisinin, as diterpenoids expressed in E. coli. Further, enzyme engineering or directed evolution of terpenoid biosynthetic enzymes, e.g. engineer enzymes to accept unnatural substrates and to catalyze regions and stereospecific reactions with an efficiency comparable with that of the natural enzymes is described, along with discussions on enhancing the production of terpenoids in Escherichia coli. In some embodiments, methods of evolving molecules may be modified from Badran, et al., “Continuous evolution of Bacillus thuringiensis toxins overcomes insect resistance”. Nature, Vol 533:58, 2016, where this reference describes a phage-assisted continuous evolution selection that rapidly evolves high-affinity protein—protein interactions, and applied this system to evolve variants of the Bt toxin Cry1Ac that bind a cadherin-like receptor from the insect pest Trichoplusia ni (TnCAD) that is not natively bound by wild-type Cry1Ac.

A. Protein Evolving Systems and Evolving Biologically Active Metabolites.

In some embodiments, methods of evolving molecules may be used to construct drug leads that can be readily synthesized in microbial hosts. It addresses a longstanding challenge—the development of low-cost pharmaceuticals—by using a sophisticated set of biophysical tools and analytical methodologies to narrow the molecular search space in lead discovery, and by explicitly considering the biosynthetic accessibility of therapeutic molecules. The approach, which departs from contemporary efforts to use microbial systems for the synthesis of clinically approved drugs and their precursors, is unique in its focus on using biology for the systematic construction of new molecules. It will accelerate the rate—and lower the cost—of pharmaceutical development.

The development of a drug requires optimization of many of its pharmacological properties—affinity, absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, toxicology, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics1. The first of these properties—protein-ligand binding affinity—generally determines whether the others are worth measuring or enhancing, and, thus, represents a property of drug leads2. Despite advances in computational chemistry and structural biology, the rational design of ligands that bind tightly to proteins—ligands, henceforth, referred to collectively as inhibitors—remains exceptionally difficult3; as a result, the development of drugs often begins with screens of large libraries of molecules4. An inhibitor, once discovered, must be synthesized in quantities sufficient for subsequent analysis, optimization, formulation, and clinical evaluation.

The difficulties associated with developing protein inhibitors are particularly problematic for natural products. These molecules, which account for over 50% of clinically approved drugs, tend to have favorable pharmacological properties (e.g., membrane permeability)5. Unfortunately, their low natural titers—which hamper the extraction of testable quantities from natural sources—and their chemical complexity—which complicates chemical synthesis—make the preparation of quantities sufficient for post-screen analyses time-consuming and expensive6.

In some embodiments, enzymes are contemplated for use to construct terpenoid inhibitors that can be synthesized in Escherichia coli; such an approach takes advantage of the chemical diversity (and generally favorable pharmacological properties) of natural products without the constraints of their natural scarcity. In some embodiments, detailed biophysical study of the molecular-level origin and thermodynamic basis of affinity and activity in protein-terpenoid interactions are included for the rapid construction of high-affinity inhibitors. In some embodiments, development of selective inhibitors of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), a target for the treatment of diabetes, obesity, and cancer is contemplated in part for using enzymes to evolve readily synthesizable drug leads.

Structurally Varied Terpenoids with Different Affinities for the Allosteric Binding Pocket of Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase 1B (PTP1B).

Hypothesis. Results indicate that abietic acid, a mono-carboxylated variant of abietadiene, is an allosteric inhibitor of PTP1B. Derivatives or structural analogs of abietadiene that differ in stereochemistry, shape, size, and/or chemical functionality (including carboxylation position) are likely to have different affinities for the allosteric binding pocket of PTP1B.

In some embodiments, (i) mutants of abietadiene synthase, cytochrome P450s, and halogenases are contemplated for use to make structural variants of abietadiene, (ii) GC/MS to identify those variants, (iii) preparative HPLC and flash chromatography to isolate them, and (iii) isothermal titration calorimetry to determine their free energies, enthalpies, and entropies of binding. In some embodiments, a set of structurally varied inhibitors with (i) affinities that differ by 100-fold and/or (ii) enthalpies and entropies of binding that suggest alternative binding geometries is contemplated.

To Examine the Molecular Basis and Thermodynamic Origin of Affinity and Activity in Enzyme-Terpenoid Interactions.

Hypothesis. Enzymes that bind, functionalize, and/or synthesize terpenoids possess large nonpolar binding pockets. We hypothesize that both (i) the affinity of an enzyme for terpenoids and (ii) the activity of an enzyme ON terpenoids is determined by the general shape and hydration structure of its binding pocket, not the position of specific protein-terpenoid contacts.

In some embodiments, a sophisticated set of biophysical tools (isothermal titration calorimetry, X-ray crystallography, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and NMR spectroscopy) are contemplated for use to (i) determine how protein-ligand contacts, rearrangements of water, and conformational constraints contribute to differences in affinity between terpenoid inhibitors and to (ii) develop a set of empirical relationships that predict how mutations in terpene synthases and terpene-functionalizing enzymes influence general attributes (e.g., shape) of their products.

To Evolve High-Affinity Terpenoid Inhibitors of PTP1B.

Hypothesis. Mutants from secondary metabolism (e.g., terpene synthases, cytochrome P450s, and halogenases) are highly promiscuous; a single mutation in or near their active sites can dramatically alter their product profiles. Mutagenesis of a small number (i.e., 2-4) of such enzymes, selected for their ability to synthesize and/or functionalize diterpenoids, will enable the development of inhibitors of PTP1B with sub-micromolar affinities.

In some embodiments, high-affinity inhibitors of PTP1B by pairing (i) high-throughput methods for detecting inhibitors with (ii) site-saturation and random mutagenesis is contemplated. For (i) we will develop four alternative fluorescence or growth-coupled assays to screen libraries of mutated pathways (and their respective products). For (ii) we use biostructural analyses and sequence alignments to identify residues likely to yield enzymes with favorable product profiles.

To Identify Structure-Activity Relationships that Enable the Evolution of Terpenoid Inhibitors of Arbitrary Protein Targets.

Hypothesis. Proteins that interact with similar classes of molecules (through binding or catalysis) have structurally similar binding pockets. Methods for evaluating these structural similarities—and their implications for enzyme activity—may enable the identification of enzymes capable of synthesizing inhibitors of ANY specified protein.

In some embodiments, a biophysical framework for using the crystal structure of a protein as a starting point to identify enzymes capable of synthesizing inhibitors of that protein is contemplated. We will examine (and formalize) structural relationships between (i) the active sites of enzymes used to synthesize allosteric inhibitors of PTP1B and (ii) the allosteric binding pocket of PTP1B, and we will validate these relationships by using them to identify—and, then, test—new enzymes capable of synthesizing inhibitors of PTP1B and (separately) undecaprenyl diphosphate synthase, a target for the treatment of antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections.

Diabetes, Obesity, and Cancer.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) contributes to insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes7, leptin resistance in obesity8, and tumor growth in breast, colorectal, and lung cancers9,11. To date, the development of selective, tight-binding inhibitors of PTP1B (i.e., treatments for diabetes, obesity, and cancer) has been hindered by the structure of its active site, where polar residues limit tight binding to charged, membrane-impermeable molecules, and where structural similarities to the active sites of other protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) lead to off-target interactions12,14. In this proposal, we will construct selective inhibitors of PTP1B that bind to its C-terminal allosteric site, a largely nonpolar region that is not conserved across phosphatases15. Previous screens of large molecular libraries have identified several ligands that bind to this site, but have yet to yield clinically approved drugs16,13. The identification of new molecular alternatives—a feat tackled in this proposal—remains a goal in efforts to develop selective PTP1 B-inhibiting therapeutics.

Development of pharmaceuticals. The development of enzyme inhibitors—or leads-represents an expensive part of drug development; for each successful drug, lead identification and optimization takes an average of 3 years and $250M to complete (−20-30% of the total time and cost to bring a drug to market)17. By narrowing the molecular search space in lead discovery, by enabling rapid construction of structurally-varied leads (often referred to as “backups”18), and by facilitating scale-up of molecular synthesis, the technology developed in this proposal could accelerate the rate—and lower the cost—of pharmaceutical development.

Molecular recognition. The hydrophobic effect—the free energetically favorable association of nonpolar species in aqueous solution—is, on average, responsible for −75% of the free energy of protein-ligand association19. Unfortunately, hydrophobic interactions between ligands and proteins—which differ dramatically in rigidity, topography, chemical functionality, and hydration structure—remain difficult to predict20. This study uses detailed biophysical analyses and explicit-water calculations to examine the thermodynamic basis of hydrophobic interactions between terpenoids and protein binding pockets. It will develop a model system and corresponding conceptual framework—for studying the hydrophobic effect in the context of structurally varied protein-ligand complexes, for accounting for that effect in the design of biosynthetic pathways, and for exploiting it in the construction of new drug leads.

Biosynthesis of New Natural Products.

Synthetic biology offers a promising route to the discovery and production of natural products. When the metabolic machinery of one organism is installed into a genetically tractable production host (e.g., S. cerevisiae or E. coli), it enables the synthesis of complex compounds at high titers (relative to the native host). This approach has enabled the efficient production of pharmaceutically relevant metabolites from unculturable or low-yielding organisms21,22, but, unfortunately, requires large investments of time and resources in pathway discovery and optimization; its use, as a result, is generally limited to the low-throughput characterization of newly discovered gene clusters or to the production of known, pharmaceutically relevant molecules (e.g., paclitaxel, artemisinin, or opioids)22,24.

In some embodiments, a strategy for using synthetic biology to build new molecular function is contemplated. It begins with a pathologically relevant protein target and engineers pathway enzymes to produce molecules that selectively inhibit that target. This approach will yield molecules that can be produced in microbial hosts without extensive pathway optimization (it relies on enzymes that are expressible by default); it will, thus, expand the use of synthetic biology to the production of leads and backups. It is not a replacement for conventional approaches to the synthesis of complex natural products, but rather, a complementary strategy for constructing new compounds that will enhance the efficiency with which pharmaceuticals are developed.

In the presence of mutated metabolic pathways (e.g., version of a plant-based terpenoid-producing pathway in which the terpene synthase has been mutated), our operon will enable screens of large numbers of metabolites for their ability to inhibit our protein of interest (e.g., PTP1B). Such a platform could be used to evolve metabolites with specific biological activities.

Detect and/or evolve highly selective molecules. We have developed an idea for a version of our operon to detect molecules that inhibit one protein over a highly similar protein. Screens for molecular selectivity are, at present, remain very difficult.

Advantages of methods and systems described herein, over some other systems for detecting small molecule inhibitors includes but is not limited to enabling the detection of molecules that modulate or change the catalytic activity of an enzyme. Moreover, some embodiments of the systems described herein allow for the detection of test molecules that change the activity of an enzyme by binding anywhere on its surface. As one example, detection of an inhibitor is contemplated that inactivates PTP1B by binding to its C-terminal allosteric site; this binding event, which distorts catalytically essential motions of the WPD loop, would not necessarily prevent enzyme-substrate association. U.S. Pat. No. 6,428,951, herein incorporated by reference in its entirety, in contrast, enables the detection of molecules that prevent enzyme-substrate binding by competing for substrate binding sites (i.e., the active site). As another example, detection of molecules that activate an enzyme of interest is contemplated as an embodiment. U.S. Pat. No. 6,428,951, herein incorporated by reference in its entirety, in contrast, has methods that merely detect molecules that prevent enzymes from binding to their substrates, or that otherwise change the affinity of enzymes for their substrates. As another example, detection of molecules that do not require an enzyme and substrate to interact with any particular affinity, orientation, or half-life is contemplated as an embodiment. U.S. Pat. No. 6,428,951, herein incorporated by reference in its entirety, in contrast, requires an enzyme and substrate to bind one another with an affinity and orientation that enable assembly of a split reporter. As a result, it may require modifications to the enzyme; in contrast, the inventors use a “substrate trapping” mutant of PTP1B to improve its affinity for a substrate domain.

As another example, some embodiments enables the detection of inhibitors of wild-type enzymes. Tu S., U.S. Pat. No. 6,428,951, herein incorporated by reference in its entirety, in contrast, requires enzymes to be fused to one-half of a split reporter.

Further, the following two publications are examples of methods that for detecting molecules that merely disrupt the binding of an enzyme to a substrate. This characteristic, among others, is in contrast to U.S. Pat. No. 6,428,951. “Protein fragment complementation assays for the detection of biological or drug interactions.” Pub. Date: Jan. 31, 2008, herein incorporated by reference in its entirety, which describes a high throughput bacteria based protein-fragment complementation assays (PCAs) wherein when two protein fragments derived from the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), coexpressed as fusion molecules in Escherichia coli, that interact in the absence of an inhibitor, then concentration dependent colony growth was observed. This reference states that PCA can be adapted to detecting interactions of proteins small molecules and provide examples, including complementary fragment fusions and a bait-fused fragment. In fact, protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B was provided in an example for detecting enzyme substrate interactions and an example of survival assay for detecting protein substrate interactions using aminoglycoside kinase (AK), an example of antibiotic resistance marker used for dominant selection of an E. coli,-based PCA. Further, a PCA is described as being applied to identify small molecule inhibitors of enzymes; natural products or small molecules from compound libraries of potential therapeutic value; may be used as survival assay for library screening; for detecting endogenous DHFR inhibitors, e.g. rapamycin; and for protein-drug interactions. Expression of PCA complementary fragments and fused cDNA libraries/target genes can be assembled on single plasmids as individual operons under the control of separate inducible or constitutive promoters with interceding region sequences, e.g. derived from a mel operon, or have polycistronic expression. The PCA can be adapted to detecting interactions of proteins with small molecules. In this conception, two proteins are fused to PCA complementary fragments, but the two proteins do not interact with each other. The interaction must be triggered by a third entity, which can be any molecule that will simultaneously bind to the two proteins or induce an interaction between the two proteins by causing a conformational change in one or both of the partners. Moreover, exemplary applications of the PCA Strategy in bacteria to protein engineering/evolution to generate peptides or proteins with novel binding properties that may have therapeutic value using phage display technology. One example of evolution produced novel zipper sequences; other examples of evolutions were described to produce endogenous toxins.

WO2004048549. Dep-1 Receptor Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase Interacting Proteins And Related Methods. Published Jun. 10, 2004, herein incorporated by reference in its entirety; describes screening assays for inhibitors that alter the interaction between a PTP and a tyrosine phosphorylated protein that is a substrate of the PTP, e.g. dephosphorylation by Density Enhanced Phosphatase-1 (DEP-1) of a DEP-1 substrate. DEP-1 polypeptides can be expressed in bacteria cells, including E. coli, under the control of appropriate promoters, e.g. E. coli arabinose operon (PBAD or PARA). This reference is similarly limited in focus as U.S. Pat. No. 6,428,951, herein incorporated by reference in its entirety; it enables the detection of molecules that disrupt the binding of a substrate to an enzyme, rather than the detection of molecules that modulate (i.e., enhance or reduce) the activity of an enzyme.

Advantages of methods and systems described herein, over some other systems for detecting small molecule inhibitors includes but is not limited to enabling the evolution of metabolites that change the catalytic activity of an enzyme. The technology described in Badran, et al., “Continuous evolution of Bacillus thuringiensis toxins overcomes insect resistance”. Nature, Vol 533:58, 2016, herein incorporated by reference in its entirety; and the platform of continuous evolution in general, has been used to evolve proteins with different affinities for other proteins/peptide substrates. It has not, however, been used to evolve enzymes that produce small molecules (i.e., metabolites) that alter the activities of enzymes or the strength of protein-protein interactions.

Another advantage of methods and systems described herein, over some other systems for detecting small molecule inhibitors includes the discovery of metabolites with targeted biological activities but unknown structures (e.g., the ability to inhibit protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B). There are many inventions relevant to the production of terpenoids in E. coli or S. cerevisiae (e.g., Moses, et al., “Bioengineering of plant (tri)terpenoids: from metabolic engineering of plants to synthetic biology in vivo and in vitro.” New Phytologist, Volume 200, Issue 1, where this reference describes synthesis of artemisinic acid, the precursor of the antimalarial drug artemisinin, as diterpenoids expressed in E. coli. Further, enzyme engineering or directed evolution of terpenoid biosynthetic enzymes, e.g. engineer enzymes to accept unnatural substrates and to catalyze regions and stereospecific reactions with an efficiency comparable with that of the natural enzymes is described, along with discussions on enhancing the production of terpenoids in Escherichia coli.); in many cases, the metabolic pathways responsible for making these terpenoids are mutated to improve production levels. However, the use of biosensors (i.e., constructs that report on the concentrations of various metabolites) has focused on the detection of specific intermediates (e.g., farnesyl pyrophosphate, a precursor to terpenoids) not for combining (i) mutagenesis of a metabolic pathway and (ii) a biosensor for specific biological activity (e.g., the ability to inhibit PTP1B) for the discovery of new biologically active molecules (which may possess unknown structures).

High-Throughput Metabolic Engineering.

Microbial pathways are most efficiently optimized with high-throughput screens. Unfortunately, at present, such screens are sparse, and those available rely on signals (e.g., absorbance or fluorescence, association with a product-specific transcription factor, or growth permitted by an essential metabolite) that are difficult to extend to broad classes of molecules (e.g., those without distinct optical or metabolic properties)27. The proposed work develops high-throughput screens for terpenoids with a targeted activity—the ability to inhibit PTP1B—rather than a targeted structure; these activity-focused screens could be broadly useful for building (i.e., evolving) new biologically active small molecules.

Identification of new inhibitors: a starting point. We recently discovered that abietic acid, the primary component of resin acid, is an allosteric inhibitor of PTP1B (FIG. 22). We will use abietadiene, the immediate precursor of this molecule, as a starting point for the design of inhibitors. Abietadiene has several attributes that make it particularly compatible with our approach: (i) It can be synthesized in E. coli at titers (200 mg/L) that permit purification, NMR analysis, and calorimetric studies28, (ii) Mutants of its associated terpene synthase—abietadiene synthase—yield a range of hydrocarbon scaffolds that differ in stereochemistry, shape, and size (and that still enable analysis and purification)29-31, (iii) It—and similar molecules—can be functionalized by cytochrome P450s and halogenases32-34.

Metabolic engineering. We have engineered a strain of E. coli to produce abietadiene at titers (>150 mg/L) sufficient to permit the analytical methods (i.e., GC/MS, ITC, and NMR). Our biosynthetic pathway has two requisite operons: MBIS, which converts (RJ-mevalonate to farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP), and TS, which converts farnesyl pyrophosphate to abietadiene. One optional operon—MevT, which converts acetyl-CoA to (RJ-mevalonate—is necessary when mevalonate is not included in the media35. The plasmids pMevT and pMBIS were developed by the Keasling Laboratory36. The plasmid pTS, which contains abietadiene synthase (ABS) from Abies grandis, was developed as in Morrone28 with a gene for geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase from Ajikumar37.

Improved inhibitors. We assessed the ability of minor structural perturbations of abietadiene derivatives to yield improved inhibitors by comparing four structurally related (and commercially available) molecules (FIG. 16): abietic, neoabietic, levopimaric, and dihydroabietic acid. Surprisingly, dihydroabietic acid was ten times more inhibitory than abietic acid (K, ˜25 uM vs. 250 uM). Our ability to find an improved inhibitor in this small screen suggests that the kinds of structural variations explored in this study—and the sizes of molecular libraries generated—are likely yield improved inhibitors.

Functionalization of abietadiene. We assessed the ability of mutants of cytochrome P450bm3 to functionalize abietadiene-like molecules by installing five readily available mutants (G3, KSA-4, 9-1 OA, 139-3, and J, which were engineered for activity on amorphadiene38 and steroids39) into our heterologous pathway; three mutants yielded hydroxylated and/or carboxylated products, generating up to 0.3 mg/L of abietic acid (FIG. 17). The abietadiene-functionalizing activity of mutants originally engineered for other targets suggests that we will be able to develop mutants of P450bm3 with even higher activities on abietadiene-like molecules.

Biostructural analyses. We have crystallized PTP1B in our lab, collected X-ray diffraction data in collaboration with Peter Zwart at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab (LBNL), and solved its crystal structure (FIG. 17A inset). We have also co-crystallized PTP1B with abietic acid; we will analyze these crystals in late July (first available beam time).

Recently, we expressed N15-labeled PTP1B and used it to collect two-dimensional 1H-15N HSQC spectra in collaboration with Haribabu Arthanari at Harvard Medical School (FIG. 17A main). The spectra include PTP1B bound (separately) to abietic acid and known inhibitors; at present, we are processing the data. Preliminary results (X-ray and NMR) suggest that biostructural studies of PTP1B bound to different inhibitors will be straightforward.

High-throughput screens. Upon binding to inhibitors (both competitive and allosteric), PTP1B exhibits changes in conformation that quench its tryptophan fluorescence (the basis of one of our four high-throughput screens). FIG. 17B indicates that such quenching can be used to distinguish between inhibitory extract (i.e., a hexane overlay) from an abietadiene-producing strain of E. coli and non-inhibitory extract from a control strain (i.e., one with a catalytically inactive ABS). FIG. 17C indicates that such changes can also be used to detect 50 uM (15 mg/L) of abietic acid. Our ability to detect (i) abietadiene in culture extract and (ii) abietic acid at low concentrations (i.e., tenfold lower than our titers of abietadiene) suggests that we will be able to detect improved inhibitors of PTP1B, even if they are accompanied by reductions in titer.

Providing structurally varied terpenoids with different affinities for the allosteric binding pocket. This section describes developing a set of inhibitors with incremental differences in affinity that result from systematic differences in structure. The goal (metric for success): a minimum of −15 structurally varied inhibitors with (i) affinities for PTP1B that differ by 100-fold and/or (ii) enthalpies and entropies of binding that suggest alternative binding geometries.

Research plan. In the sections that follow, we use enzymes to build selective terpenoid inhibitors of PTP1B. This enzyme is the initial focus of our work because it is a therapeutic target for diabetes, obesity, and cancer, and it can be expressed, crystallized, and assayed with ease15. It, thus, serves as a pharmaceutically relevant model system with which to develop a general approach for the enzymatic construction of drug leads.

Hypothesis for structural changes. In this section, we use promiscuous enzymes to construct terpenoids that differ in stereochemistry, shape, size, and chemical functionality. We believe that these modifications will affect the affinity of ligands for PTP1B by altering (i) their ability to engage in van der Waals interactions with nonpolar residues (e.g., F280, L192, and F196) in the allosteric binding pocket, (ii) their ability to engage in direct or water-mediated hydrogen bonds with proximal polar residues (e.g., N193, E200, and E276), (iii) their ability to engage in halogen bonds with either set of residues, (iv) their influence on molecular conformational constraints, and, (v) their ability to reorganize water during binding. This hypothesis (which is supported, in part, by FIG. 16) motivates the synthetic strategy described herein.

Stereochemistry, shape, and size. We will begin by using mutants of ABS to generate diterpenoids that differ in stereochemistry and shape FIG. 18A). ABS uses two active sites to catalyze sequential class II (protonation-dependent) and class I (ionization-dependent) cyclization of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP, C2o) into abietadiene29. Previous studies indicate that amino acid substitutions in its active sites can alter the stereochemistry or shape of its products29,31. We will use mutations (new and previously identified) that affect the position of deprotonation, intramolecular protein transfer, or carbocation stability (FIG. 8B). After installing these mutants into E. coli, we will use GC/MS to search for new products (fragmentation tools such as MetFrag40 or ACD/MS Fragmenter41 will facilitate identification of novel compounds).

We will generate terpenoids that differ in size by using mutations that increase/decrease the volume of the active sites of ABS. Previous attempts to change the substrate specificities of terpene synthases42,43 suggest that such mutations could enable enhanced activity on farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP, CI5) and farnesylgeranyl pyrophosphate (FGPP, C2s). To synthesize FGPP, we will incorporate an FGPP synthase previously expressed in E. coli44.

We will isolate a subset of new terpenoids with particularly high titers by using flash chromatography and HPLC (a task for which feasibility has been established in several studies28,31,45), and we will use ITC to measure the free energy (AG°birid), enthalpy (AH°bind), and entropy (−TAS°bind) of binding to PTP1B. Differences in AG°bind between ligands will reveal how structural changes affect the strength of binding; differences in AH°bind and −TAS°bind will reveal their influence on binding geometry46,47.

Hydroxylation and halogenation. For each of the three ligands selected in 6.1.2, we will use mutants of cytochrome P450 BM3 (P450bm3) from Bacillus megaterium and/or CYP720B4 (P45072o) from Picea sitchensis to construct five variants with hydroxyl or carboxyl groups at different positions (FIGS. 19A and 19B). P450bm3 can hydroxylate a wide range of substrates, including terpenoids48; P45072o can carboxylate over 20 diterpenoids, including abietadiene49. Both enzymes can be expressed in E. coli4A.

We will work with several sets of mutations: For P450bm3, we will use (i) three (V78A, F87A, and A328L) that permit the stereoselective hydroxylation of sesquiterpenes and diterpenes50, (ii) five (L75A, M177A, L181A, and L437A) that enable hydroxylation of alkaloids and steroids51), and (iii) two (F87V and A82F) that permit carboxylation of heteroaromatics (FIG. 18D)52. For P45072o, we will examine −10 similar mutations likely to alter the position of oxidation. We will, again, screen each mutant in E. coli, isolate interesting products, and use ITC to analyze them.

For each of two high-affinity oxygenated ligands, we will construct six variants with bromide or iodide at different positions (FIG. 18C). These two halogens can engage in halogen bonds with oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur acceptors in proteins53, and can bind small nonpolar declivities on their surfaces54. The energetic contribution associated with both interactions tends to increase from Br to I54,55 and, thus, lends itself to systematic analysis (i.e., a physical organic approach). To generate halogenated ligands, we will use mutants of tryptophan 6-halogenase (SttH) from Streptomyces toxytricini and vanadium haloperoxidase (VHPO) from Acaryochloris marina. These enzymes can introduce halogens (chloride, bromide, or iodide) into sp2-hybridized carbons of alkaloids or terpenoids (before or after cyclization)56,57. For each enzyme, we will examine several mutations known to change regioselectivity (e.g., L460F, P461E, and P452T for SttH56) and 5-10 mutations likely to change the orientation of bound FIG. 19 Examples: (FIG. 19A) carboxylated, (B) hydroxylated, ligands (FIG. 19E). We will, again, screen (FIG. 19C) and halogenated diterpenoids. (FIG. 19D-E) Residues each mutant in E. coli and use ITC to targeted for mutagenesis in (FIG. 19D) P450bm3 and (FIG. 19E) SttH.

### IV. Evolving High-Affinity Terpenoid Inhibitors of PTP1B.

This section develops four high-throughput screens for rapidly evaluating the strength of PTP1B inhibitors, and it uses those methods, in conjunction with site-saturation and random mutagenesis, to evolve new inhibitors. The goal: a set of evolved inhibitors with particularly high affinities (KD{circumflex over ( )}1 uM) and/or unpredictable structures (i.e., structures inconsistent with rational design).

Biological selection. A selection method (i.e., a growth-coupled screen) in which the survival of E. coli is linked to inhibitor potency will enable rapid screening of extremely large libraries of molecules (1010)66. In this section, we develop such a method.

PTP1B catalyzes the dephosphorylation—and inactivation—of several cell surface receptors. We will use the tyrosine-containing regions of these receptors to build an operon that links inhibition of PTP1B to cell growth. This operon will require six components (FIG. 21A): (i) a substrate domain (the tyrosine-containing region of a receptor) tethered to a DNA-binding protein, (ii) a substrate recognition domain (a protein that binds the tyrosine-containing region after its phosphorylation) tethered to the co subunit of an RNA polymerase, (iii) a tyrosine kinase, (iv) PTP1B, (v) a gene for antibiotic resistance, and (vi) an operator for that gene. With this system, inhibitors of PTP1B will enable binding of the substrate and substrate recognition domains, recruitment of RNA polymerase to the DNA, and transcription of the gene for antibiotic resistance. Previous groups have used similar operons to evolve protein-protein binding partners; here, we take the additional steps of (i) using a protein-protein interaction mediated by enzymes (PTP1B and a kinase) and of (ii) screening that interaction in the presence of potential inhibitors of one of those enzymes.

We will develop our operon by starting with a luminescence-based system, and we will add an antibiotic resistance gene as a final step. In our preliminary work with a system optimized by Liu et al.67, we obtained a tenfold difference in Lux-based luminescence between a strain expressing two binding partners and a strain expressing one (FIG. 21E; arabinose induces expression of the second partner). We now plan to introduce—and test—different substrate domains, recognition domains, and kinases (eGFR and Src).

A FRET sensor for PTP1B activity. A high-throughput screen in which inhibition of PTP1B is linked to cell fluorescence will enable rapid screening via fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). This technique tends to produce more false positives than selection and limits libraries to sizes of 107-108, but it requires fewer heterologous genes27,66.

For this strategy, we will make use of FRET (Forster resonance energy transfer) sensors commonly used to monitor kinase and phosphatase activity in mammalian cells68,69. These sensors consist of a kinase substrate domain, a short flexible linker, and a phosphorylation recognition domain—all sandwiched between two fluorescent proteins. Phosphorylation of the substrate domain causes it to bind to the recognition domain, inducing FRET between the two fluorescent proteins. In a PTP1B-compatible sensor, inhibitors of PTP1B will increase FRET (FIG. 21B). We have begun to develop such a sensor by trying different combinations of substrate domains, recognition domains, and kinases. (Note: FACS enables FRET-based screens70,71).

A FRET sensor for changes in the conformation of PTP1B. A FACS-based screen in which changes in cell fluorescence result from binding-induced changes in the conformation of PTP1B would be less generalizable than strategies 2 and 3 (which could be used for any kinase or phosphatase), but would require only one heterologous gene.

For this strategy, we will make use of a FRET experiment carried out by the Tonks Group13. These researchers sought to show that the binding of trodusquemine to PTP1B caused the protein to become more compact. To do so, they attached members of a FRET pair to each terminus of the PTP1B (FIG. 21C); upon protein-ligand association, an increase in FRET signal indicated that its termini approached one another. We hypothesize that this construct could be used as a sensor for identifying other molecules that bind to the allosteric site of PTP1B. We will begin by testing it with a variety of known inhibitors (a step the Tonks group did not take).

Binding-induced changes in the tryptophan fluorescence of PTP1B. A screen in which inhibition of PTP1B is linked to changes in tryptophan fluorescence (FIG. 21D) will enable rapid screening of moderately sized libraries (103-104)27 in microtiter plates. Our use of binding-induced changes in tryptophan fluorescence is described in 5.6. In future work, we plan to extend this approach to other protein tyrosine phosphatases, many of which are allosteric and possess many tryptophans (e.g., SHP-2, a target for Noonan syndrome72)

Mutagenesis. To use our high-throughput screens to evolve inhibitors of PTP1B, we will build libraries of mutated terpenoid pathways by using (i) site-saturation mutagenesis (SSM; we will target binary combinations of sites) and (ii) error-prone PCR (ep-PCR).

For SSM, we will identify “plastic” residues likely to accommodate useful mutations by developing functions similar to Eq. 1. This function scores residues based on their ability to accommodate mutations that influence the volume and hydration structure of an active site; S is a metric for the propensity of a residue to permit mutations, cr2 is the variance in volume of

s=4+RTW  (EQ 1}

similarly positioned residues in the active sites of other enzymes, A{circumflex over ( )}w is the variance in hydrophilicity of those residues, and NV and NHW are normalization factors. In our preliminary analysis of ABS, we successfully used Eq. 1 (and structure/sequence information from Taxadiene, y-humulene, 5-selenine, and epi-isozizaene synthases) to identify residues for which mutations are known to yield new products (e.g., H348 of ABS)31. We note: Previous attempts to identify plastic residues have scanned each site near the bound substrate73; our approach will be unique in its inclusion of biophysical considerations from (i) our study of optimal ligand attributes (6.2.1) and (ii) our study of the types of mutations that bring them about (6.2.2). For library construction, we will explore mutating our pathway (i) enzyme-by enzyme (e.g., ABS, then P450bm3, and then VttH) or (ii) at random. The second approach could give us access to structures that might be difficult to find with conventional approaches to lead design.

To identify structure-activity relationships that enable the evolution of terpenoid inhibitors of arbitrary protein targets. This section develops a biophysical framework for using a crystal structure of a protein to identify enzymes capable of making inhibitors of that protein. The goal: the use of that framework to identify—and, then, test—enzymes capable of synthesizing new inhibitors of PTP1B and (separately) undecaprenyl diphosphate synthase (UPPS), a target for antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections.

Relationships between binding pockets. We will begin by determining how similarities in specific properties of binding pockets (e.g., volume, polarity, and shape) enable enzymes to synthesize, functionalize, and/or bind similar molecules. This effort will involve comparisons of the allosteric binding pocket of PTP1B with the binding pockets (i.e., active sites) of enzymes involved in inhibitor synthesis. For these comparisons, we will construct two matrices: matrix A in which each element (ay) represents the similarity of a specific property between binding pockets i and j ((0<aij<1, where 1 is highly similar) and matrix B in which each element (by) describes the ability of binding pockets i and j to bind similar molecules (0<by<1, where 1 represents identical binding specificities). The rank of the matrix formed by the product of these two matrices (AB) will suggest the number of independent variables (i.e., active site attributes) necessary to determine the functional compatibility of enzymes in a metabolic pathway; the eigenvalue will suggest the relative importance of the property under study (described by matrix A).

We will construct matrix A with PyMol- and MD-based analyses of protein crystal structures. We will construct matrix B by examining the binding of functionalized terpenoids and their precursors to each enzyme involved in terpenoid synthesis. Binding affinities for some of these ligand/protein combinations will be measured with ITC; most will be estimated with docking calculations (OEDocking78).

The result of this section will be an equation similar to Eq. 2, where J is a metric for an active site's ability to synthesize

J=wvV+wpP+WiL+wwW (Eq. 2) terpenoids that bind a particular binding pocket; V, P, L, and W represent specific properties of that active site (volume, polarity, longest diameter, and shortest diameter); and w's represent weighting factors. The final number of variables—and their respective weights—will be determined through the above analysis. In parameterizing the equation, we plan to examine different metrics for properties of binding pockets (e.g. shape) and to explore/develop different matrix manipulations.

Validation and Extension.

The identification of promising active site motifs for inhibitor synthesis will require a search of available protein structural data. We will perform such a search by using PROBIS (probis.nih.gov79), an alignment-based platform that uses a specified binding site to find similar binding sites on other proteins in the Protein Data Bank. PROBIS can identify similarly shaped binding pockets, even when the protein folds that surround those pockets are different (i.e., it detects similar constellations of amino acids).

To begin, we will use a PROBIS-based search to identify enzymes with active sites that have some level of structural similarity (we will explore different thresholds) to either (i) the allosteric binding site of PTP1B or (ii) the active sites of enzymes capable of synthesizing inhibitors of PTP1B. Using Eq. 2, we will select enzymes with the most favorable active sites and test them with our platform for inhibitor development).

We will assess the generalizability of our approach by attempting to construct inhibitors of UPPS, a protein known to bind terpenoids and polycyclic molecules80. Structure-based searches will use two starting points: (i) UPPS and (ii) mutants of ABS, P450bm3, or similar enzymes that our biophysical analyses suggest might yield UPPS inhibitors. We will, again, select a subset of enzymes to test with our platform.

### VI. Evolving Optogenetic Actuators: Photoswitchable Constructs.

A. Optical Control with Red and Infrared Light.

Contemporary efforts for using light to control enzyme activity have relied on at least two optogenetic actuators: LOV2, which has terminal helices that are destabilized by blue light (−450 nm)2,18,48, and Dronpa, which switches from a dimer to a monomer in response to green light (−500 nm)19. Unfortunately, blue and green light suffer from problems of phototoxicity, penetration depth, and spectral similarity that limit their use in signaling studies21. Thus, in one embodiment, photoswitchable enzymes stimulated by red or infrared light are contemplated for development. These wavelengths have lower phototoxicities and greater penetration depths than blue and green light2° ′21, and will permit multi-color actuation alongside blue or green light.

B. An Operon to Evolve Photoswitchable Constructs.

In one embodiment, an operon that links the activity of PTP1B to cell growth is contemplated. In brief, this operon is based on the following control strategy (some additional details in FIG. 10): A kinase stimulates the binding of two proteins, which in turn, promote transcription of an essential gene; PTP1B suppresses the binding of these two proteins and, thus, inhibits transcription. This operon allows cells in possession of photoswitchable variants of PTP1B to grow faster in the presence of one light source than in the present of another (e.g., 750 nm vs. 650 nm). The difference in growth rates enables the identification of functional chimeras. Initial experiments with an operon based on Lux-based luminescence (based on a system developed by Liu and colleagues53) show a 20-fold difference in luminescence between a strain expressing two model binding partners and a strain expressing one (FIG. 3E). We will continue to develop this operon by adding a protein-protein interaction that is modulated by a PTP and PTK (see below).

This operon allows cells in possession of photoswitchable variants of PTP1B to grow faster in the presence of one light source than in the present of another (e.g., 750 nm vs. 650 nm). The difference in growth rates enables the identification of functional chimeras. Initial experiments with an operon based on Lux-based luminescence (based on a system developed by Liu and colleagues 53) show a 20-fold difference in luminescence between a strain expressing two model binding partners and a strain expressing one (FIG. 3E). We will continue to develop this operon by adding a protein-protein interaction that is modulated by a PTP and PTK.

FRET sensors. We will use Forster resonance energy transfer (FRET) to monitor the activity of PTP1B in living cells. Our preliminary sensor exhibits a 20% reduction in FRET signal when treated with Src kinase (FIG. 3F). Previous imaging studies indicate that a 20% change in FRET is sufficient to monitor intracellular kinase activity54″56. To enhance spatial resolution in imaging studies, we will attempt to optimize our sensor further (and use it to measure the activity of PTP1B in vitro).

1. To Evolve Phosphatases and Kinases Modulated by Red and Infrared Light.

This section uses directed evolution to build enzymes that can be turned “on” and “off” with red and infrared light. We will know that we are successful when we have (i) built a genetic operon that links the activity of PTP1B to antibiotic resistance, (ii) A used that operon to build a PTP1 B-phytochrome chimera that exhibits a three- to ten-fold change in activity in response to red and infrared light, and (iii) built similar phytochrome chimeras of STEP and PTK6.

Hypothesis. Phytochrome proteins exhibit global conformational changes when exposed to red and infrared light27,28, but to date, have eluded rational integration into photoswitchable enzymes. We hypothesize that a genetic operon that links PTP or PTK activity to cell growth will enable the evolution of PTP- or PTK-phytochrome chimeras stimulated by red or infrared light.

Experimental approach: We will build an operon that links PTP1B inhibition to antibiotic resistance, and we will use that operon to evolve photoswitchable PTP1 B-phytochrome chimeras. This effort will involve (i) the construction a library of PTP1 B-phytochrome chimeras that differ in linker composition and/or linker length, (ii) the use of our operon to screen that library for functional mutants, (iii) a kinetic and biostructural characterization of the most photoswitchable mutants, and (iv) the extension of this approach to STEP and PTK6. This effort has two major goals: a variant of PTP1B modulated by red and/or infrared light, and a general approach for using directed evolution to extend optical control to new enzymes and different wavelengths of light.

2. Development of a Synthetic Operon for Evolving PTP1 B-Phytochrome Chimeras.

We will build a variant of PTP1B that can be modulated by red and infrared light by attaching its C-terminal a-helix to the N-terminal a-helix of bacterial phytochrome protein 1 (BphP1) from Rhodopseudomonas palustris (FIG. 9); this protein undergoes a reversible conformational change when exposed to 650 nm and 750 nm light. Phytochromes such as BphP1 are valuable for photocontrol because they can be actively toggled between conformations (i.e., turned “on” and “off”). Their structures, however, are not compatible with cage-based actuation (they do not undergo large-scale “unwinding”); they have, thus, been overlooked in previous efforts to develop photoswitchable enzymes.

We will evolve photoswitchable PTP1B-BphP1 chimeras by using a genetic operon that links PTP1B activity to antibiotic resistance. This operon will consist of six components (FIG. 10A-B): (i) a PTP1B substrate domain tethered to a DNA-binding protein, (ii) a substrate recognition domain (i.e., a substrate homology 2 domain, or SH2) tethered to the subunit of an RNA polymerase, (iii) an Src kinase (a kinase capable of phosphorylating a wide range of substrates), (iv) PTP1B (or a potentially photoswitchable variant of PTP1B), (v) a gene for antibiotic resistance, and (vi) an operator for that gene.

With this system, light-induced inactivation of PTP1B will enable transcription of the gene for antibiotic resistance. Previous groups have used similar operons to evolve protein-protein binding partners (our system is based on an operon used by Liu et al. to evolve insecticidal proteins53); here, we take the additional (new) steps of (i) using a protein-protein interaction mediated by enzymes (phosphatases and kinases) and (ii) screening that interaction in the presence and absence of light.

We have begun to develop our operon by using a Lux-based luminescence as an output. Preliminary results show that model protein-protein binding partners can elicit a 20-fold change in luminescence (FIG. 3E). We plan to swap out these binding partners with substrate and SH2 domains, and test the new system alongside simultaneously expressed PTP1B and Src kinase (which have some complementary activities, and can be expressed in E. coli68,69).

Advantages of using operons expressing photosensitive phosphatases includes but is not limited to enabling high-throughput screens of mutants of photoswitchable enzymes and provides a method for screening the libraries of enzymes that they motivate, see, FIG. 5A for example. In contrast, have shown that mutagenesis a photoswitchable enzyme can adjust (i.e., improve) its dynamic range (i.e., ratio of dark-state activity to light-state activity); while some published studies, such as WO2011002977. Genetically Encoded Photomanipulation Of Protein And Peptide Activity. Published Jan. 6, 2011, have proposed, but not shown, that mutagenesis of protein light switches might enable spectral tuning of photoswitchable enzymes. WO2011002977, provides a list of sites that could be mutated to modify the flavin-binding pocket of LOV2 to accept flavins that absorb light at alternative wavelengths. However, their construct is described as a LOV2 domain of Avena sativa (oat) phototropin 1 (404-546), including the C-terminal helical extension J alpha where Ja unwinds instead of the A alpha helix described herein. Nonetheless, there is no available method for carrying out high-throughput screens of mutants with modified binding pockets for which the invention described herein provides a platform for doing so. Further, in contrast to WO2013016693. “Near-infrared light-activated proteins.” Publication Date Jan. 31, 2013, inventions described herein provide a platform for screening potentially improved/modified variants of photoswitchable proteins, such as a plant phototropin 1 LOV2.

Additionally, methods for screening the libraries of enzymes enable the detection of (i) molecules or (ii) photoswitchable domains that change the activity of any enzyme that, in turn, can modulate the affinity, or outcome associated with, a protein-protein interaction: protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPs) and protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) are demonstrated. Moreover, proteases are contemplated as proteins to add to this system.

C. Directed Evolution.

We will build libraries of PTP1B-BphP1 chimeras by pairing overlap extension PCR (oePCR) with error-prone PCR (epPCR). Specifically, we will use oePCR to build chimeras that differ in linker length (here, we define the linker as the −20 residue region comprised of the C-terminal a-helix of PTP1B and the N-terminal a-helix of BphP1), and we will use epPCR to vary linker composition. Depending on the results of this initial library, we may extend error-prone PCR into the BphP1 gene, but we will not mutate PTP1B beyond its C-terminal a-helix.

In the presence of a small amount of antibiotic (i.e. an amount that impedes the growth of E. coli), our genetic operon will cause cells that contain functional PTP1B-BphP1 chimeras to exhibit different growth rates under red and infrared light. We will exploit these differences to identify cells that harbor photoswitchable constructs. In brief, we will (i) generate two replicate plates of cell colonies, (ii) grow one under red light and one under infrared light (FIG. 11 A), and (iii) select a subset of colonies (top hits) that show differential growth. We will further characterize our top hits by growing them in small-scale liquid cultures (e.g., 96-well plates with ˜1 ml/well; FIG. 11B) under red and infrared light, and by sequencing the PTP1 B-BphP1 genes of colonies that show the greatest different in growth rates.

We will attempt to build enzyme-phytochrome chimeras of STEP and PTK6 by pursuing two strategies: (i) We will replace PTP1B in our final PTP1B-BphP1 chimera with STEP or PTK6; this strategy will allow us to assess the modularity of our final design, (ii) We will use our operon-based approach to evolve functional STEP-BphP1 and PTK6-BphP1 chimeras; this strategy will allow us to assess the generalizability of our approach to evolution.

Operons for evolving STEP-BphP1 and PTK6-BphP1 chimeras will closely resemble the PTP TB-specific operon. For STEP, we will use a STEP-specific substrate and SH2 domain (Src kinase, which has a broad substrate specificity, is likely to have complementary activities on a subset of STEP substrates); for PTK6, we will use a recognition process that is inhibited—not activated—by phosphorylation (here, we can use PTP1BWas the complementary enzyme).

D. Extension of Approach.

We will attempt to build enzyme-phytochrome chimeras of STEP and PTK6 by pursuing two strategies: (i) We will replace PTP1B in our final PTP1B-BphP1 chimera with STEP or PTK6; this strategy will allow us to assess the modularity of our final design, (ii) We will use our operon-based approach to evolve functional STEP-BphP1 and PTK6-BphP1 chimeras; this strategy will allow us to assess the generalizability of our approach to evolution.

Operons for evolving STEP-BphP1 and PTK6-BphP1 chimeras will closely resemble the PTP TB-specific operon. For STEP, we will use a STEP-specific substrate and SH2 domain (Src kinase, which has a broad substrate specificity, is likely to have complementary activities on a subset of STEP substrates); for PTK6, we will use a recognition process that is inhibited—not activated—by phosphorylation (here, we can use PTP1BWT as the complementary enzyme)

F. Exemplary Contemplated Characterization: Biophysical Characterization of Enzyme-Phytochrome Chimeras.

We will examine the structural basis of photocontrol in the most photoswitchable chimeras by using a subset of crystallographic and kinetic analyses. X-ray crystal structures will show how BphP1 affects the structures of PTP1B, STEP, and PTK6. Kinetic studies will show how BphP1 affects substrate specificity and binding affinity (or more specifically, Km, which is affected by binding affinity).

## ABBREVIATIONS

PTP IB, protein tyrosine phosphatase IB; TC-PTP, T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase; SHP2, protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 11; BBR, 3-(3,5-Dibromo-4-hydroxy-benzoyl)-2-ethyl-benzofuran-6-sulfonicacid-(4-(thiazol-2-ylsulfamyl)-phenyl)-amide; TCS401, 2-[(Carbox-ycarbonyl)amino]-4,5,6,7-tetrahydro-thieno[2,3-c]pyridine-3-carboxylic acid hydrochloride; AA, abietic acid; SCA, statistical coupling analysis. PTP1B1-435, protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (full-length); SacB, levansucrase; GHS, γ-humulene synthase; ADS, amorphadiene synthase; ABS (or AgAs), abietadiene synthase; TXS, taxadiene synthase, PTPN5, protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 5; PTPN6, protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 6; PTPN11, protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 11; PTPN12, protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 12; PPTN22, protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 22; RpoZ, omega subunit of RNA polymerase; cI (or c1434), cI repressor protein from lambda phage; Kras (or p130cas), p130cas phosphotyrosine substrate; MidT, phosphotyrosine substrate from hamster polyoma virus; EGFR substrate, phosphotyrosine substrate from epidermal growth factor receptor; Src, Src kinase; CDCl37, Hsp90 co-chaperone Cdc37; MBP, maltose-binding protein; LuxAB, bacterial luciferase modules A and B; SpecR, spectinomycin resistance gene; GGPPS, geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase; P450 (or P450BM3) Cytochrome P450; LOV2, light-oxygen-voltage domain 2 from phototropin 1; BphP1, bacterial phytochrome; Galk, galatokinase.

## Examples

The following examples are offered to illustrate various embodiments of the invention, but should not be viewed as limiting the scope of the invention.

Statistical Analysis of Kinetic Models. We evaluated four kinetic models of inhibition as described previously (19). In brief, we used an F-test to compare a two-parameter mixed model to several single-parameter models, and we used Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC, or Ai) to compare the single-parameter models to one another. Mixed models with p<0.05 are superior to all single-parameter models, and single-parameter models with Aj>10 are inferior to the reference (i.e., “best fit”) model.

Exemplary Estimation of IC50. We estimated the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of BBR by using kinetic models to estimate the concentration of inhibitor required to reduce initial rates of PTP-catalyzed hydrolysis of 20 mM of pNPP by 50%, and we used the MATLAB function “nlparci” to determine the confidence intervals on those estimates (19).

All publications and patents mentioned in the above specification are herein incorporated by reference. Various modifications and variations of the described methods and system of the invention will be apparent to those skilled in the art without departing from the scope and spirit of the invention. Although the invention has been described in connection with specific preferred embodiments, it should be understood that the invention as claimed should not be unduly limited to such specific embodiments. Indeed, various modifications of the described modes for carrying out the invention that are obvious to those skilled in medicine, molecular biology, cell biology, genetics, statistics or related fields are intended to be within the scope of the following claims.

