# DESCRIPTION

## FIELD OF THE DISCLOSURE

The present disclosure relates to a biomarker useful as a drug target for treating diabetes and cancer. Further, inhibiting Wdr13 can treat oligospermia and azoospermia conditions. The present disclosure relates to the creation and characterization of mutant mouse strain lacking Wdr13 gene leading to higher insulin levels and increased islet mass as a result of the enhanced beta cell proliferation, which resulted in age dependent mild obesity phenotype. Further, over expression of this protein leads to up regulation of p21 protein levels and results in cell growth retardation.

## BACKGROUND

WD-repeat proteins belong to a large family of structurally related proteins, members of which have diverse functions such as cell cycle regulation, transcription, chromatin organization and protein trafficking [1,2]. These proteins provide a platform for protein-protein interactions. WDR13 protein is a member of this family and localizes to the nucleus [3]. Wdr13 gene is highly conserved in vertebrates and is expressed in most of the tissues [4], the highest level of expression being in pancreas, brain, testis and ovaries. This gene is located on the X-chromosome at locus Xp11.23 and XA1.1 in human and mouse, respectively. In human, X chromosomal deletions including this gene have been associated with mental retardation, obesity and xeroderma [5,6,7,8]. Several WD-repeat proteins have been identified which express in pancreatic beta cells and have roles in beta cell proliferation [9,10].

The beta cell mass is regulated by the balance between neogenesis/proliferation and apoptosis/necrosis. In mice, differentiation of islet precursor and expansion are responsible for beta cell neogenesis until the first week of life [11,12]. Thereafter, expansion of existing beta cells is the main source of newly formed beta cells [13,14]. In pathological conditions there can be alpha to beta cell trans-differentiation [15]. Various cell cycle regulators have been identified which have role in pancreatic beta cell proliferation [16]. Cell cycle progression in pancreatic islet is controlled by cyclins, cyclin dependent kinases (CDKs), cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors and hormones, namely: androgen and estrogen [16,17]. Estrogen enhances pancreatic beta cell mass by protecting them from apoptosis [17,18,19,20].

Pancreatic islet mass, insulin production and body weight are inter-related [12,21]. Insulin levels have been positively correlated with obesity in humans [22] and rodents [23]. Generally, obesity leads to higher demand for insulin production and the same is met by the increase in beta cell mass. Obesity is also a major risk factor for the onset of peripheral insulin resistance [24]. Insulin resistance leads to further higher demand for insulin from beta cells triggering beta cell failure. This leads to beta cell survival defects, insufficient beta cell mass and deterioration of key beta cell function such as glucose stimulated insulin secretion, and ultimately type 2 diabetes. Thus, the mass of insulin producing beta cells changes dynamically according to the metabolic conditions [25,26]. Alternatively, obesity may be a consequence of higher insulin levels [27,28,29] as insulin has stimulatory effect on adipogenesis by increasing the lipid accumulation in adipocytes [30,31,32]. Insulin is also involved in adipocyte survival [33]. Adipose tissue-specific insulin receptor knockout protects against obesity, emphasizing that insulin signaling to adipocytes is important for development of obesity [31]. Hyper insulin secretion in MOR-1 opioid receptor knockout mice results in more body weight gain with age [29] whereas CHOP knockout mice become obese by increasing insulin secretion although without affecting glucose tolerance [34].

To understand the in vivo role of Wdr13 gene, we have created a mouse strain lacking this gene and show that these mice have higher pancreatic islet mass as a result of higher beta cell proliferation, develop hyperinsulinemia and mild obesity. We have also identified several interacting partners of WDR13 protein and provide evidence that this protein may be working as a repressor of transcription.

## DEFINITIONS

WD-Repeat Proteins

The proteins containing structural conserved motif, generally ending with a di-peptide, tryptophan-aspartic acid at c-terminal. However the number of repeats may vary from 4-16 in a given WD-repeat protein.

Chimaeras

Chimera is single organism having two types of genetically distinct cells in its various tissues.

Knockout Mice

A genetically engineered mice in which an endogenous gene on chromosome is inactivated by replacing or disrupting it with a piece of DNA introduced by human intervention.

Obesity

Obesity is a medical condition in which body accumulates excess fat such the excess fat may have a negative health outcome.

Pancreatic Beta Cells

Insulin producing cells in pancreatic islets are known as pancreatic beta cells.

## SUMMARY

Accordingly, the present disclosure relates to the use of WDR13 protein as a drug target for curing diabetes and cancer. To address the in vivo function of Wdr13 gene, a member of WD-repeat gene family, we created a mouse strain lacking this gene. In the present study we show that WDR13 is a novel negative regulator of beta cell proliferation. The mutant mice showed significantly higher islet mass, elevated blood insulin levels, age dependent mild obesity and better glucose clearance without any indication of insulin resistance. The enhanced beta cell proliferation in the mutant mice may be due to down regulation of p21, a known cell cycle inhibitor. Consistent with these findings, overexpression of WDR13 in MIN6 cells leads to upregulation of p21 and retardation of cell proliferation. Finally, we show that WDR13 is a novel negative regulator of beta cell proliferation WDR13 acts as a repressor of estrogen receptors mediated transcription both in HDAC-dependent and HDAC-independent manner.

In an embodiment of the present disclosure a biomarker having SEQ ID No: 1 useful for treating diabetes and cancer.

In another embodiment of the present disclosure an expression construct having SEQ ID) NO: 2 useful for targeting WDR13 gene consisting of:


- - a. Neomycin with polyA as positive selection marker.
  - b. HSV-tk as negative selection marker.
  - c. 1.6 kb 5′ homology region for 5′ recombination.
  - d. 4.1 kb 3′ homology region for 3′ recombination.

In another embodiment of the present disclosure a method of preparing a murine tumor model system comprising:


- - a. providing SEQ ID NO: 1 as claimed in claim **1**
  - b. preparing WDR13 targeting construct
  - c. electroporating WDR13 targeting construct as claimed in step b in
    ES cells,
  - d. selecting targeted ES cell clones obtained in step c by southern
    blot,
  - e. generating knockout mice from targeted ES cell clones obtained in
    step d by known methods,
  - f. breeding of knockout mice obtained in step e for getting
    germ-line transmission by known methods,
  - g. obtaining mouse tumor model

In another embodiment of the present disclosure a tumor model system useful for studying the progression of cancer at their multistage.

In another embodiment of the present disclosure a method of treating Cancer comprising overexpressing the gene sequence as claimed in claim 1 using adenoviral system (100MOI) in MIN6 cells.

In another embodiment of the present disclosure a method of treating diabetes and enhancing beta cell proliferation by disrupting the biomarker in the beta cells.

In another embodiment of the present disclosure a use of WDR13 as a negative regulator of beta cell proliferation.

In another embodiment of the present disclosure a use of WDR13 as a repressor of estrogen receptors in HDAC dependent (ERα) and in HDAC independent (ERβ) manner.

In another embodiment of the present disclosure a use of WDR13 protein and its downstream targets for modulation of beta cells and testicular spermatogonial cells proliferation in vive.

In another embodiment of the present disclosure a use of WDR13 protein and its downstream targets in discovery of drugs for modulation of cell proliferation as claimed in 9.

In another embodiment of the present disclosure a use of the WDR13 knockout mice model system in studying the effect of drugs selected from the group comprising of drugs having anti proliferative activity.

An aspect of the present disclosure is to provide a biomarker WDR13 protein having (SEQ ID NO: 1) useful for treating diabetes and cancer.

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to provide WDR13 gene targeting vector (SEQ ID NO: 2)

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to provide a method of treatment of diabetes by enhancing beta cell proliferation.

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to provide a method of treatment of cancer.

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to provide use of WDR13 as a novel negative regulator of beta cell proliferation and its application.

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to provide use of WDR13 as a repressor of estrogen receptors mediated transcription.

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to provide use of WDR13 protein and its downstream targets for modulation of pancreatic beta cells and testicular spermatogonial cells.

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to provide use of WDR13 knockout mice model system in studying the progression of cancer at their multistage.

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to provide use of WDR13 knockout mice model system in studying the effect of drugs selected from the group comprising of having anti proliferative activity.

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to generate a murine tumor model system comprising:


- - a. Providing WDR13 gene having SEQ ID NO: 1
  - b. Targeting ES with the gene obtained in step a.
  - c. Generation of Knockout mice from targeted ES cells
  - d. Breeding of knockout mice
  - e. Obtaining mouse tumor model

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to use this method for preparing a murine tumor model system.

Another aspect of the present disclosure is to generate a mouse tumor model system.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION

### Examples

The following examples are given by way of illustration of the present disclosure and therefore should not be construed to limit the scope of the present disclosure.

**Generation of Wdr13 Knockout Mice**

Wdr13 is a single copy gene located on X-chromosome [4]. The targeting strategy was designed to substitute intron 1 (partial), exon 2, intron 2 and exon 3 (partial) of the endogenous gene with neomycin gene cassette containing polyA (FIG. 1A). To construct the Wdr13 gene targeting vector SEQ ID NO: 1, a 7.1 kb HindIII fragment from this gene including exon1 to exon7 was sub-cloned in pBluescript II KS vector (Stratagene). A 1.35 kb region from this fragment spanning exon 2 and exon 3 (partial) was replaced by XhoI-SalI fragment of pMC1neo Poly A (Stratagene). To further enrich for the targeting events, a negatively selectable HSV-tk gene was placed before the 5′ end of homologous sequences from Wdr13 gene. The resulting vector had homologies of 1.6 kb and 4.1 kb at the 5′ and 3′ ends, respectively. Forty micrograms of linearized targeting vector DNA was electroporated into R1 ES cells. The ES cells were selected with G418 (0.25 mg/ml) and ganciclovir (2 μM). To identify targeted clones, genomic DNA was isolated from ES cells and southern hybridization was performed using a 700 bp EcoRV-BamHI fragment as a probe from the 5′ end of this locus (FIG. 1B). One of the targeted clones was injected into 3.5-dpc C57BL/6 blastocysts and the latter were transferred into the uteri of CD1 pseudopregnant females. To obtain germline transmission of the mutant allele, chimaric male mice were mated with CD1 female. Germ line transmission was confirmed by southern analysis. PCR was used for regular screening of mutant mice using a primer pair (Table 1) from the Wdr13 locus and another primer pair from neomycin gene.

To further confirm the targeting of Wdr13 gene northern blot and western blot was performed. Various tissues were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80° C. till further use. Total RNA was isolated using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). For Northern analysis, RNA was electrophoresed on 1% agarose gel containing 2.2M formaldehyde and blotted on hybond N+ membrane with 50 mM NaOH. Wdr13 cDNA was radio labeled with adATP using random priming kit. Hybridization was performed overnight at 65° C. in 0.5M phosphate buffer/7% SDS/1 mM EDTA and the membranes were then washed 3× at 65° C. in 40 mM phosphate buffer/1% SDS/1 mM EDTA. The membranes were exposed to X-ray sheets (Fuji films) and developed. Northern blot analysis using Wdr13 cDNA probe revealed the lack of 4 kb and 2 kb transcripts from brain and testis of knockout mice, respectively as compared to the wild type tissues (FIG. 1C). Proteins were extracted from various tissues, separated on 10% SDS-PAGE, blotted on PVDF membranes and western blots were performed. Anti-WDR13 purified antibody (Sigma) was used for visualization of the protein. Western blot using anti WDR13 antibody showed the absence of WDR13 protein in various tissues of the knockout mice (FIG. 1D). These results confirmed that targeting of Wdr13 gene had led to the generation of a null allele.

**Wdr13 Knockout Mice were Viable and Fertile**

Wdr13−/0 male and Wdr13−/− female knockout mice were viable and fertile. Given the comparatively high level of expression of Wdr13 gene in spermatogonia and spermatocytes, and the presence of a different size transcript in testis [4], we analysed the litter size from various matings involving mutant and wild type mice. The genotypes of the parents had no effects on the litter size (Table 2). The sperm number from Wdr13−/0 males (40.6±5.49 million/ml) was similar to that of Wdr13+/0 (37.9±3.05 million/ml).

**Increased Body Weight of Wdr13 Knockout Mice**

Mice were housed in temperature, humidity and light/dark cycle (12 hrs 6 am-6 pm) controlled animal rooms. Autoclaved normal diet or high fat diet was fed ad libitum, and feed intake was measured weekly. Mice were weighed fortnightly. Wdr13 deficient mice differentiated in body weight from their wild type littermates around nine months of age when fed normal chow. At 11 months the mutant male and female mice had 13% and 11% higher body weights (P≦0.05), respectively than their littermates (FIGS. 2A, B). To determine the body composition, mice were dissected and weight of various organs was measured. The weight of epididymal fat pad was 2.5-fold more in Wdr13−/0 mice in comparison to that of wild type, whereas the weight of ovarian fat pad was 2- fold more in Wdr13−/− in comparison to that of the wild type (FIG. 2D). Histological examination of epididymal fat pad revealed adipocyte hypertrophy in Wdr13 knockout mice (FIG. 2C). Adipocyte hypertrophy was also noticed in skin sections of mutant mice. Various organs including, brain, lung, heart, liver, pancreas, spleen and testis of mutant and wild type mice were weighed at 12 months. Mutant mice had significantly higher pancreatic weight. Even the pancreatic weight relative to body weight was more in the mutant mice. There was no difference in the weights of other organs (Table 3).

To understand the effect of diet on the higher body weight of mutant mice, one month old mice were kept on a high fat (60%) diet. Interestingly, Wdr13−/0 weighed significantly more at five months (FIG. 3A) indicating the advancement of mild obesity phenotype of mutant mice.

**Example 4**

Glucose and insulin levels in Wdr13 knockout mice Given the age-dependent obesity phenotype, we measured fasting and random blood glucose levels at different age points in mice fed with normal chow (FIGS. 2E, F). Blood glucose was measured with a glucometer using Sensor Comfort strips (Accu-Check). There was no effect of Wdr13 genotype on fasting glucose levels. Similarly, the random glucose levels at 2 months did not differ between the mutant and wild type mice. However, the mutant mice showed lower random glucose at 12 months on normal chow. In the light of lower random glucose at 12 months, we estimated the serum insulin levels using ELISA kits (Linco Research). The fasting insulin levels were similar in the wild type and mutant mice at both age points (FIG. 2G). While random insulin levels in Wdr13 deficient and wild type mice at 2 months were similar, interestingly, at 12 months mutant mice had 2.13 fold more random insulin level on normal chow (FIG. 2H). Similarly, the mutant mice had 1.6-fold more random insulin levels at six months when fed on a high fat diet (FIG. 3B).

**Increased Glucose Clearance but Unaltered Insulin Sensitivity in Wdr13 Knockout Mice**

Given the high level of random insulin levels in Wdr13 deficient mice, we challenged these mice with glucose to determine their glucose clearance at 2 months and 12 months on normal chow, and at 6 months on a high fat diet. To compare glucose clearance and insulin secretion, the mice were kept off-feed for 16 hours, glucose was injected intraperitoneally (2.0 grams glucose/Kg body weight) and blood was collected at 0″, 30″, 60″ and 120″ intervals for glucose and insulin measurement. The mutant and wild type mice showed similar glucose clearance (FIGS. 4A, B) at 2 months. At 12 months the mutant mice appeared to have better glucose clearance; however, the difference was not statistically significant. The mutant mice showed consistently better glucose clearance at 6 months on a high fat diet (FIG. 3D). Insulin tolerance was estimated by measuring glucose levels at 0″, 30″, 60″ and 120″ intervals after injecting human insulin intraperitoneally (IU/kg). Wdr13−/0 mice responded to extraneous insulin in a manner similar to the wild type, indicating that insulin sensitivity was not different at 2 months (FIG. 4C) and 12 months (FIG. 4D) on normal chow. Similarly, there was no evidence of insulin resistance in the mutant mice at 6 months (FIG. 3C) and 9 months (FIG. 4E) on a high fat diet, notwithstanding significantly higher random insulin levels in these mice (FIG. 3B).

**Increased Islet Mass and Beta Cell Proliferation in Wdr13 Knockout Mice**

Since Wdr13 deficient mice were hyperinsulinemic and mildly obese, we analyzed the pancreatic histology at 6 months in these mice when fed a high fat diet. For histological examination, tissues were fixed overnight in buffered 4% para formaldehyde, embedded in paraffin and sectioned (4 μm thickness). Sections were mounted on positively charge slides (Fisher Scientific) and were stained with hematoxylin-eosin. Pancreatic and islet areas were measured from pancreatic sections from four mice each of the wildtype and mutant genotypes using Axioskop (Axivision software). Islet mass per pancreas was calculated by multiplying relative islet area with wet mass of pancreas. Interestingly, total islet mass was significantly more in Wdr13 knockout mice at 6 months (FIGS. 5A, B). To understand the increased islet mass, we measured beta cell proliferation by in-situ BrdU labeling. Briefly, one month old mice were kept on a high fat diet for three weeks before infusion of BrdU. To assay beta cell proliferation assay Brdu was given to mice in drinking water (1 mg/ml) for 7 days, pancreatic sections were taken and subjected to immunostaining with anti-insulin (R&D System) and anti-Brdu (BD Biosciences) antibodies. Primary antibody was detected by cy3 or FITC-conjugated antibodies. We observed a 2-fold more proliferation of beta cells in Wdr13 mutant mice as compared to their wild type littermates (FIGS. 6A, B). Similarly there was a trend in more spermatogonial cell proliferation in testis of Wdr13 knockout mice (FIG. 7).

**Higher Insulin Level in Knockout Mice is Due to the Increased Islet Mass Rather Than Insulin Secretion Per Unit Islet**

Given the better glucose clearance in Wdr13−/0 mice, glucose was injected into 6 month old (on high fat diet) fasting mice and the insulin secretion was monitored at different time points (FIG. 3E). Insulin secretion after 30 minutes of glucose injection was 1.8 fold more in Wdr13−/0 mice. The higher insulin levels in the mutant mice might be the result of the increased islet mass observed by us in these mice (FIGS. 5A, B) or might result from higher insulin secretion per unit beta cell in response to glucose stimulation. To rule out the latter possibility, we isolated islets from 3 month old Wdr13−/0 and their wild type littermates (n=3) as described by Ting Wen et. al. [29]. Briefly, 2 mg/ml collagenase type IV (Invitrogen) dissolved in Hanks' balanced salt solution (HBSS) was injected in common bile duct and the pancreas were incubated at 37° C. for 30 minutes. After collagenase digestion pancreatic tissue was washed twice with cold HBSS and islets were purified by Ficoll gradient. The purified islets were washed two times with HBSS and transferred to RPMI1640 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum 100 U/ml penicillin, and 50 μg/ml streptomycin for overnight recovery. Next morning, islets were transferred to Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate buffer (111 mM NaCl, 4.8 mM KCl, 2.3 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM MgSO4, 25 mM NaHCO3) supplemented with 10 mM HEES, 2.8 mM glucose, 0.2% BSA and incubated for 90 minutes at 37° C. with 5% CO2. To measure the insulin secretion in vitro, five equal size islets were plated (in triplicate) in a single well of 96-well plate containing either 250 μl Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate buffer/2.8 mM glucose or 250 μl Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate buffer/16.0 mM glucose and were incubated for 1 h at 37° C. with 5% CO2. The supernatant was collected and stored at −80° C. for insulin measurement. There was no difference in the in vitro insulin secretion between the mutant and wild type islets (FIG. 5C).

**Overexpression of Wdr13 Gene Results in Cell Growth Retardation**

To further understand the role of Wdr13 gene in beta cell proliferation, WDR13 protein was overexpressed in MIN6 cell line using pAd Easy system. To overexpress WDR13 protein, Wdr13 adenovirus constructs were generated. In brief, Wdr13 cDNA was amplified from pCMV-FLAG-Wdr13 (SEQ ID NO: 3) vector using T7 forward primer (SEQ ID NO: 17) and reverse primer 5′GCTCTAGAGCAGCACAGGGTGACAGAACC3′, digested with Pmel and cloned at EcoRV of pAdTrack-CMV vector. AdGFP or AdWdr13 were generated in HEK293 packaging cell lines according to He et al., [35]. MIN6 cells, HEK293 cells and MCF7 cells were obtained from Cell Repository, National Centre for Cell Science, Pune, India. 10,000 Min6 cells were seeded per well of 24 well plates [36] and were transfected either with AdGFP or AdWdr13 using a titre of 20 or 100 MOI. Cell number was monitored by MTT assay as well as by cell counting at 24 h interval. For western blot analysis, MIN6 cells transfected with 100 MOI with AdGFP or AdWdr13 virus and cells were lysed 48 hour post transfection. MIN6 cells were transfected with AdGFP and AdWdr13 with 100 MOl each in 24 well plates. After 48 hours of transfection, overexpression of Wdr13 was confirmed by western blot (FIG. 8A) using anti WDR13 antibody. Further, MIN6 cells growth curve was prepared by cell counting after overexpression of WDR13 at 100 MOI. At 100 MOI there was significant reduction in cell growth after 48 h post transfection (FIG. 8A). The growth retardation phenotype was further observed in MCF7 cells (FIG. 8B). To understand the growth retardation by overexpression of WDR13 various cell cycle regulators were analyzed by western blotting. The protein levels of cyclin D1, cyclin D2, cyclin E and p27 were unaltered, whereas p21 was highly upregulated after overexpression of WDR13 protein (FIG. 8C). Conversely, in the Wdr13 knockout islets, western blot revealed reduction in p21 levels (FIG. 6C). To understand the nature of p21 regulation by WDR13, promoter occupancy of WDR13 protein was analyzed at p21 promoter. MIN6 cells were transfected with AdGFP and AdWdr13 using 20 MOI and allowed to grow for 48 hours. The cells were crosslinked in 1% formaldehyde for 10 minutes at room temperature and scraped in PBS containing protease inhibitors. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed using the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Assay Kit, Millipore (Catalogue Number: 17-295) as per the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, cell lysate was precleaned by incubating in agarose beads for 1 h at room temperature followed by immunoprecipitation with anti-FLAG agarose beads for 3 h. The beads were washed and the genomic DNA fragments were eluted for identification of various promoter regions by PCR. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiment showed interaction of WDR13 with p21 promoter sequences indicating a direct role of WDR13 in p21 regulation (FIG. 8D).

**Identification of Proteins Interacting with WDR13**

Eukaryotic Linear Motif resource for functional sites in proteins showed that WDR13 protein contains five WD-repeats and a nuclear receptor box (LNKLL) at position 378-382 (FIG. 9) along with various casein kinase and GSK3 phosphorylation sites. Generally WD-repeat proteins provide a platform for protein-protein interactions. The presence of LxxLL motif further opens up the possibility that WDR13 may interact with nuclear receptor(s) in a ligand dependent or independent manner. To identify its interacting partners, immunoprecipitation was performed (FIG. 10C) in Hela cells which expresses WDR3. To overexpress FLAG-WDR13 fusion protein, pCMV-FLAG-Wdr13 (SEQ ID NO: 3) plasmid was constructed by cloning Wdr13 cDNA [4] at EcoRI and XbaI sites of pCMV-FLAG plasmid. The overexpression of WDR13 was confirmed by western blot and immunolocalization (FIGS. 10A, B). For immunoprecipitation, pCMV-FLAG-Wdr13 (SEQ ID NO: 3) plasmid and control pEF1GFP plasmid DNAs were transfected into HELA cells (plated in ten 100 mm dishes for each plasmid) using Xfect reagent 1371. After 48 h cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM-Tris.HCl, 150 mM-NaCl, 1 mM-EDTA, 1%-Triton X-100 and Protease inhibitor cocktail) or (50 mM-Tris.HCl, 150 mM-NaCl, 1 mM-EDTA, 1%-Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS and Protease inhibitor cocktail). Cell lysate was centrifuged and pre-cleaned with Protein A. Anti-FLAG agarose beads (Sigma) were added into the pre-cleaned lysate and the lysate were incubated for 4 h at room temperature. The immuno complex was washed 4× with wash buffer (50 mM-Tris.HCl, 150 mM-NaCl, 1 mM-EDTA, 0.5%-Triton X-100 and Protease inhibitor cocktail). Immunocomplex was eluted using FLAG peptide (Sigma) and separated on 12% SDS PAGE. The gel was either stained with 0.1% Coomassie Blue R-250 (in 40% methanol and 10% acetic acid) or blotted on PVDF membrane. The gel was cut into 3 slices of roughly equal size and used for tryptic digestion as per manufacturer's instructions (Sigma). Peptides were separated using a capillary liquid chromatography system (Agilent HPLC 1100 Series, Agilent Technologies), which was attached with a reversed-phase column (ZORBAX 300SB-C18, 75 μm×150 mm, 3.5 μm, Agilent Technologies) that was coupled online to a MALDI target spotter (Probot, LC Packings, Dionex). Mass-spectrometric analysis was performed on a 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). All MS/MS-spectra were searched against the Swissprot 2009 Homo sapiens protein sequence database. MASCOT Server (version 2.0) in combination with the GPS-Explorer™ 3.6 software (Applied Biosystems) was used for identification of proteins. Peptides having peptide ion score ≧15 were considered as significant ID. The list of proteins identified from three independent experiments is summarized in Table 4.

**WDR13 Interacts with HDAC 1, 3 and 7**

LC-MS/MS results (Table 4) indicated that HDAC7 interacted with WDR13. The interaction of HDAC7 and WDR13 was further validated by co-immunoprecipitation experiment in HEK293 cells (FIG. 11C). The interaction of HDAC7 with WDR13 opened up the possibility that this protein might interact with other HDACs, given the structural and functional similarities of various HDACs [38]. To test this hypothesis, both class I and class II HDACs were individually co-immunoprecipitated with WDR13. To overexpress various HDACs pCMX-hHDAC1-FLAG, pCMX-mHDAC2-FLAG, pCMX-hHDAC3-FLAG, pCMX-hHDAC4-FLAG, and pCMX-mHDAC7-FLAG were used and to overexpress Myc WDR13 fusion protein, pCMV-Myc-Wdr13 (SEQ ID NO: 4) plasmid was constructed by cloning of Wdr13 cDNA at EcoRI and XbaI sites pCMV-Myc vector containing Myc peptide sequence at N-terminal. These experiments showed interaction of WDR13 with HDAC1 and HDAC3 but not with HDAC2 and HDAC4 (FIG. 11C).

**WDR13 Interacts with Nuclear Receptor ERα, ERβ and PHIP1 but not with NR2E1**

The LC-MS/MS results (Table 4) indicated interaction of WDR13 with PHIP1, NR2E1 and ERβ (albeit the ion score was low). The presence of LxxLL motif (FIG. 9) in WDR13 protein encouraged us to further examine the interactions of WDR13 with nuclear receptors, namely; ERα, ERβ, NR2E1 and PHIP1 through co-immunoprecipitation. Various overexpression vectors were constructed. For overexpression of Myc NR2E1 fusion protein, the nuclear receptor 2E1 cDNA (SEQ ID NO: 18 and 19) was cloned from brain using 5′CCGGAATTCCGGATGAGCAAGCCCGCCGOATC3′ and 5′GCTCTAGAGCTTTTGAGGCTTGACCTGCAT3′ primer pairs and cloned at EcoR1 and Xba1 sites of pCMV-Myc plasmid. For overexpression of Myc PHIP1 (Pleckstrin homology domain interacting protein1) fusion protein the PHIP1 cDNA was amplified from testis using forward primer (SEQ ID NO: 20) 5′CTCGTGAGCACACACTGACA3′ and reverse primer (SEQ ID NO: 21) 5′TTCCATATCCCAAGGACTCA3′ for N-terminal WD domain and forward primer (SEQ ID NO: 22) 5′CCCAGGAGATGTCCATTTGT3′ and reverse primer (SEQ ID NO: 23) 5′AATCCGTCATAGCAGCAAGG3′ for C-terminal bromodomain. pCMV-Myc-PHIP1 (SEQ ID NO: 24) plasmid was generated by ligating these two fragments. For overexpression of ERα, pCI-nGL1-HEGO plasmid was used [39]. To construct Myc-tagged estrogen receptor beta, the ERβ cDNA (SEQ ID NO: 24 and 25) was amplified from testis using 5′GCAGGAATTCATGTCCATCTGTGCCTCTCT3′ and 5′CAGTCTAGATCACTGTGACTGGAGGTTCTG3′ primer pairs and cloned at EcoRI and Xba1 sites of pCMV-Myc vector. The co-immunoprecipitation experiment showed interaction of ERα and ERβ with WDR13 in a ligand-independent manner (FIGS. 11A, B). Further, the co-immunoprecipitation experiment showed interaction of PHIP1 with WDR13 (FIG. 11D). However, we could not detect any interaction of WDR13 with NR2E1 (FIG. 10D) under our experimental conditions.

**Repression of ERα and ERβ by WDR13**

To understand the functional significance interactions of WDR13 with ERα, ERβ and HDACs, a transient luciferase assay was performed (FIG. 11E). 3XERE-TATA-LUC vector (SEQ ID NO: 8) was constructed by cloning estrogen response element and TATA sequence at SmaI, BglII sites of PgI3 vector [40]. For estradiol (10 nM) and trichostatin A (50 nM) treatment; HIEK293 cells were cultured in phenol red free DMEM, 5% charcoal stripped Serum, 50 μg/ml ampicillin and 50 μg/ml streptomycin. Cells were transfected using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) as per the manufacturer's instructions. Overexpression of WDR13 resulted in ˜2-fold reduction in ERE-driven luciferase activity mediated by ERα or ERβ.

This repression in the reporter activity in the case of ERα was relieved by trichostatin A (TSA), a HDACs inhibitor, whereas there was no effect of TSA on ERβ mediated activity, indicating that WDR13 might be repressing the ERα-mediated transcription through HDACs.

Statistical Analysis

The unpaired two-tailed t test was used for statistical analysis. Microsoft Excel software was used for calculation of P values. A P value <0.05 was considered as significant. Data are presented as mean±SEM.

Ethics Statement

All mice experiments were conducted as per the approval of the Institutional Animal Ethics Committee of the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.

## Discussion

In the present study, we have examined the in vivo role of one of the WD-repeat proteins, namely, WDR13 by knocking out this gene in mouse. The mutant mice were viable and fertile without any overt phenotype except that the mice were significantly heavier than their wild type littermates at around nine months and continued to weigh more till the termination of the growth experiment at 12 months when fed on normal chow. This age-dependent higher body weight of the mutant mice advanced to five months when these mice were fed on a high fat diet (FIG. 3A). Anatomical and histological examination revealed that the increased body weights of mutant mice were mainly due to increase in the adipose tissue volume/weight resulting from hypertrophy of adipocytes without any indication of change in adipocyte numbers (FIG. 2C).

The Wdr13 knockout mice were mildly obese and hyperinsulinemic at 12 months on normal diet and at 6 months on a high fat diet, whereas fasting insulin levels were normal. Dynamic changes in the insulin producing pancreatic beta cell mass according to metabolic conditions and positive correlations between body weight, insulin production and islet mass are well documented [12,41]. Various studies have shown that the increase in insulin levels may be a compensatory mechanism to the decreased peripheral insulin sensitivity in response to obesity, ultimately leading to islet failure and to type 2 diabetes [42]. On the other hand, it is also known that higher insulin levels result in higher glucose uptake by adipose tissues, which would in turn alter the lipid metabolism and adipogenesis [43]. Consistent with the latter findings, insulin receptor knockout mice exhibited decreased adipose tissue [44]. In Wdr13 knockout mice, islet mass, insulin levels and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion were more at 6 months on a high fat diet. Notwithstanding higher body weights at 6 month and onwards, these mice were having better glucose clearance, whereas insulin sensitivity was normal as evident from ITT results. We suggest that the body weight gain in Wdr13 knockout mice may be related to the general growth stimulatory effect of higher insulin rather than higher insulin levels being a feedback to the mild obesity observed by us in Wdr13 mice. Insulin stimulates hepatic lipogenesis as well as lipid absorption by adipocytes leading to the increased adipose tissue formation [30]. Moreover, insulin receptor glucose transporter-4 pathway helps to convert glucose to lipid in adipose tissues [43]. In addition to the role of insulin in adipogenesis, insulin secretion has been positively correlated with obesity in humans [22], rodents [23] and non mammalian avian models [45]. We did not observe any difference in insulin sensitivity of the mutant mice from that of wild type littermates at least up to 12 months. As discussed above glucose clearance was better in Wdr13 knockout mice, suggesting that higher insulin secretion in these mice is responsible for low glucose levels observed in the present study. Therefore, given that the insulin sensitivity is normal in the knockout mice, insulin hyper secretion appears less likely to be a compensatory response of the islets as a consequence of mild obesity in these mice. Hyperinsulinemia, accompanied by mild obesity in the Wdr13 knockout mice is reminiscent of MOR1 [29] and chop [28,34] knockout, mice where adiposity is enhanced by higher insulin secretion. The food intake was marginally higher in the Wdr13 knockout mice as compared to the wild type littermates but not statistically significant. Since Wdr13 expresses in hypothalamus and other regions of the brain [7], the possibility of Wdr13 gene having a role in feeding behaviour and or in general metabolism cannot be ruled out in other tissues based upon our present study.

We have earlier reported relatively higher level of expression of Wdr13 in pancreas [3], and the expression of this gene in the pancreatic islets is much more as compared to extremely low levels seen in the acinar cells (FIG. 1D). The Wdr13 knockout mice had more pancreatic islet mass when fed on a high fat diet for five months after weaning at one month. To understand the phenomenon of the increased islet mass, we assayed in vivo beta cell proliferation after one-month old mice were fed high a fat diet for three weeks. The Wdr13 knockout mice had enhanced beta cell proliferation as compared to that in their wild type littermates (FIGS. 6A, B). It may be recalled here that the relative weight of pancreatic mass is significantly more in the adult mutant mice. It appears that the increase in beta cell mass in Wdr13 knockout mice may be due to the enhanced beta cell proliferation. This conclusion is further strengthened by reversal of this phenotype i.e. the growth retardation observed by us in the pancreatic MIN6 cells upon overexpression of Wdr13 gene (FIG. 8). The lack of difference between in vitro insulin secretion capacities of the wild type and knockout pancreatic islets (FIG. 5C) provides further indirect support to the above conclusion.

Various extrinsic and intrinsic factors responsible for beta cell proliferation have been reported [12,16]. Many positive regulators of beta cells exist which include incretins [46], EGF [47], lactogens and growth hormones [48], HNF-4a [49], calcineurin/NFAT [50], Wnt3a [51] and integrins [52]. Various cell cycle inhibitors (p15, p16, p18, p19, p21, p27 and p57) have been identified, which target either various cyclins or cyclin dependent kinases to inhibit progression at various stages of cell cycle [16]. In the present study, overexpression of WDR13 in pancreatic MIN6 cell line resulted in significantly higher protein level of p21, while cyclin D1, cyclin D2, cyclin E and p27 levels remained unaltered (FIG. 8C). Consistent with these results, knockout of Wdr13 gene resulted in downregulation of p21 in pancreatic islets [53] of the knockout mice (FIG. 6C).

Wdr13 is a member of WI)-repeat protein family and these proteins are known to play roles in protein-protein interactions [1]. Our coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that WDR13 interacts with ERα, ERβ, PHIP1 (pleckstrin homology domain-interacting protein1), HDAC1, HDAC3, and HDAC7. The interactions of WDR13 with PHIP1 (contains bromodomain), ERα, ERβ and histone deacetylases suggest a role(s) of WDR13 in chromatin regulation(s).

PHIP1 contains a WD domain at the N-terminal and a bromodomain at the C-terminal along with bipartite nuclear localization signal, resulting in nuclear localization of this protein [9]. Bromodomain-containing proteins have been reported to perform dual function (co-activator and co-repressor) [54]. The overexpression of PHIP1 has been shown to stimulate cell proliferation by enhancing the cyclin D2 levels in pancreatic MIN6 cell line, whereas knockdown of PHIP1 had a reverse effect [9]. However, these studies had not mentioned the levels of other cyclins and CDK1s. In our experiments the overexpression of Wdr13 gene in pancreatic MIN6 cell line showed upregulation of p21 accompanied by growth retardation. Based upon these observations and the evidence of interaction of WDR13 with PHIP1 we propose that these two proteins may be acting together to modulate beta cell proliferation. Further experiments will be needed to understand the functional significance of this interaction in beta cell proliferation and molecular mechanisms thereof.

We have shown that WDR13 interacts with estrogen receptors (α, β) independent of ligand, and in the ERE luciferase reporter assays WDR13 represses the activity of estrogen receptors HDAC-dependent (ERα) and independent (ERβ) manner (FIG. 11). Interactions of WDR13 with ERα/ERβ may be mediated through LxxLL motif present in WDR13 (FIG. 9), however, this needs to be confirmed by site-directed mutational analysis. Other studies have shown that ERα and ERβ function differentially in various tissues [17,55,56]. Protective roles of estrogen and estrogen receptors have been documented in the case of pancreatic beta cells [17]. Increased islet mass and beta cell proliferation in Wdr13 knockout mice may be resulting from removal of repressive actions of Wdr13 on estrogen receptors at some genomic loci. Down regulation of p21 in Wdr13 knockout islets, upregulation of p21 in pancreatic MIN6 cells as a result of overexpression of Wdr13 gene and evidence for p21 promoter occupancy by WDR13 in CHIP experiments in the present study strongly suggest that the p21 gene is a target of WDR13. Interestingly, regulation of p21 by ERα and HDACi (HDAC inhibitors) has been reported [57,58]. ERα suppresses p21 expression in the presence of estrogen by recruiting corepressors in a p53-dependent manner [59]; the use of HDAC inhibitors results in p21 upregulation and retardation of cell proliferation [57]. However, our reporter assay findings with ERE elements suggest that the interaction of ERα with WDR13 suppresses ERα in a HDAC-dependent manner. One way to reconcile these seemingly contradictory data is to hypothesize that the interaction of WDR13 with ERα at p21 promoter represses ERα in HDAC-independent manner. Such a scenario would explain upregulation of p21 by WDR13 observed in our study (FIG. 8C). Several repressor proteins are known that interact with ERα and may act either in HDAC-dependent or HADC-independent manner in different tissues/target genes [60]. In this context, it is interesting to note that interaction of WDR13 with ERβ at ERE element resulted in repression in a HDAC-independent manner (FIG. 1E).

It may be recalled that Wdr13 gene is expressed in most of the tissues and it is possible that some of the interactions of this protein with its partners may even be tissue-specific, and consequently the precise mechanism of action may differ in different tissues and/or at different target genes. Extensive CHIP experiments will be necessary to unravel various target genes of WDR13 and the mode of action at these loci in various cell types.

In conclusion, we provide evidence that WDR13 deficiency in mice leads to increased beta cell mass, hyperinsulinemia, better glucose clearance and mild obesity. We suggest that these pancreatic-related phenotypic changes observed by us in the mutant mice are consequences of enhanced beta cell proliferation resulting from downregulation of p21 in the absence of WDR13 in these cells. However, further studies are necessary to reveal any other phenotypic changes associated with this mutation. Further, our data provide evidence that WDR13 interacts with ERα, ERβ, PHIP1 and various HDACs i.e. 1, 3 & 7. The interactions of WDR13 with ERs are estradiol independent and lead to their repression as seen in ERE reporter assays. Interestingly, this repression by WDR13 is both HDAC-dependent (ERα) and HDAC-independent (ERβ). Finally, we propose that given the higher insulin levels, better glucose clearance and the lack of evidence for insulin resistance in Wdr13 knockout mice, this protein may be explored as a potential candidate drug target for ameliorating impaired glucose metabolism in diabetes.

## Illustrative Advantages:

- - 1. A novel protein having role in glucose homeostasis and cell
    proliferation has been identified.
  - 2. A novel repressor of estrogen receptor α and estrogen receptor β
    has been identified.

- 3. A novel regulator of estrogen receptor ac that regulates in HDAC
  dependent manner and estrogen receptor β that regulates it in HDAC
  independent manner has been identified.
  - 4. A novel regulator of p21 expression has been identified.
  - 5. WDR13 is a novel protein which is useful as a drug target in the
    treatment of diabetes and cancer.

Although the apparatus and methods have been described in connection with specific forms thereof, it will be appreciated that a wide variety of equivalents may be substituted for the specified elements described herein without departing from the spirit and scope of this disclosure as described in the appended claims.

