# Experimental Section

Patterning was successfully demonstrated within a vacuum in the 10−7 to 10−6 Torr range for substrate temperatures between 20 K and 100 K. Cooling is achieved using either a liquid nitrogen reservoir or a repurposed cryogenic pump depending on the desired base temperature. With the substrate sufficiently cooled, CO2 gas (Airgas, 99.999%) is introduced to the substrate via 1/4” copper tube attached to either a mass flow controller or variable leak valve depending on the desired flow rate; the flow rate also being a function of temperature and pressure; see Supporting Information.

In the resistive heating experiments, 160 nm-thick ITO was patterned by traditional contact photolithography and etched with aqua regia. Copper foil tape was used to make contact from the ITO on the substrate to a ceramic power feedthrough. A sourcemeter (Keithley 2400) was used to drive 100 mA of current through 100 μm-wide lines resulting in heating at a rate of 225 mJ cm−2 s−1 until the frozen CO2 formed the intended pattern observed from a camera mounted in situ.

We used SU-8 2150 photoresist to fabricate our stamps following prior reports.[30] When spun onto silicon wafers at 3,000 RPM, thicknesses of ∼115 μm were obtained. Contact photolithography resolved pillars that tapered slightly after development in propylene glycol methyl ether acetate (PGMEA). For these experiments, the tapering is not so severe as to interfere with patterning as the resist thickness is on the order of 50 μm. The thickness and density of frozen CO2 films is measured by double interferometry, as detailed in the Supporting Information.[27], [31], [32]

For experiments with temperatures less than the ∼80 K obtainable with a liquid nitrogen reservoir, a cryogenic pump was repurposed for use as a cooling source and all components are mounted onto it via an oxygen-free high-conductivity (OFHC) copper rod. All cold parts are machined out of OFHC copper and indium foil is sandwiched between all temperature-critical interfaces. A kapton encapsulated heater placed in between the substrate and substrate holder provides adequate local heating for encouraging lift-off without adding too much heat to the bulk thermal mass of the apparatus. A silicon thermal diode was attached to the copper substrate holder to approximately monitor the temperature of the sample and a cryogenic temperature controller (Lakeshore Cryotronics) is employed to manage operating temperature. Patterning is monitored using a digital microscope mounted on the stamp actuator. The repurposed cryogenic pump's compressor and cold head are briefly turned off during the actual stamping so that the vibrations do not interfere while the stamp and resist make contact.

We fabricated OLEDs using standard shadow-masking techniques to demonstrate compatibility with the low temperature substrates. Basic phosphorescent OLEDs employing fac tris(2-phenylpyridine) iridium (Ir(ppy)3) as the emitter were grown on ITO-coated glass substrates at similar temperatures as the stamping process, but active areas were defined using traditional shadow-masking techniques so as to evaluate the critical temperature-dependent parameter of using CO2 as a lift-off resist in producing organic optoelectronic devices. The substrates were detergent, solvent, and plasma cleaned prior to device fabrication. No CO2 was introduced in these experiments. N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-benzidine (MeO-TPD), 4,4′,4″-tris(carbazol-9-yl)triphenylamine (TCTA), 2,2′,2″-(1,3,5-benzinetriyl)-tris(1-phenyl-1-H-benzimidazole) (TPBi), and lithium fluoride (LiF)/aluminum (Al) were used as the hole transport, host, electron transport and cathode layers respectively.

