# APPENDIX B: S21 Measurement Circuit

A standard S 21 transmission measurement is performed in which a swept microwave tone is sent out of Port 1 of a PicoVNA 2 vector network analyzer (VNA) and down through attenuators and stages of the dilution refrigerator. The impedance of the resonator/gJJ device loads the line and scatters the incoming microwave tone. The transmitted portion of the microwave signal is amplified by a first-stage T n = 4 K CIT low noise amplifier, and then by three room temperature amplifiers, where it is detected by Port 2 of the VNA.

To improve DC isolation between the device and the VNA, we include inner/outer DC blocks on the ports of the VNA. To vary readout power incident upon to the device, we vary the room temperature attenuation between -50 dB and -80 dB. The attenuation at the fridge stages ensures the 300 K noise at room temperature is attenuated below the noise floor of the mixing chamber. In the diagram, the attenuators and amplifiers are positioned immediately under the fridge stage to which they are thermally anchored.

The heater measurements in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 of the main text are performed by applying a DC heater current I heater to the heater port of the graphene flake and reading out the corresponding voltage drop in a 4-wire measurement. To source I heater , an Agilent 33210A AWG outputs a DC voltage for the DC heating measurements of the main text and an AC voltage for the noise equiv- Application of P heater proceeds by sourcing a current I generated by a voltage sourced by the Agilent 33221A AWG and dropped over a 1 MΩ ballast resistor. After passing through a two stages of filters, the sourced current flows through the normal resistance R heater of the heater port of the graphene sample and dissipates Joule heat power in the flake. The voltage drop V across graphene heater is amplified by as SR560 preamp and read out by a 32201A digital multimeter (DMM). In this way, the P heater = I × V delivered to the graphene flake is measured in a 4-wire measurement.

alent power [29] measurements of section I. Since the ballast resistor R ballast = 1 MΩ is 3 orders-of-magnitude larger than the heater port resistance R heater ≈ 1 kΩ, the series combination of the AWG and R ballast can be wellapproximated as a current source I heater . The I heater current travels down PhBr twisted-pair lines to the heater port where it Joule heats the graphene flake. Outside of the fridge, the shield on the twisted pair lines is held at fridge ground. The return line of the twisted pair is grounded through a 100 Ω resistor to a breakout box (not shown) which is also held at fridge ground. The return line terminates at the negative terminal of the AWG. We note that the possible ground loop introduced by the grounding of the twisted pair return line through the 100 Ω resistor does not have an appreciable effect on the measurement.

APPENDIX C: S21 Fitting Procedure

Fitting of the resonance feature follows the procedure in Ref. 30. Background-subtracted S 21 transmission data is fit to a four-parameter fitting function

Extracted fit parameters include resonant frequency ω 0 , internal quality factor Q i , coupling quality factor Q c , and asymmetry parameter δω 0 . Total quality factor is defined as the parallel sum of the dissipation channels

Error bars in Fig. 2b-d correspond to the 95% (2σ) confidence level calculated from the covariance matrix of the fits. An asymmetry in the resonance circle can cause the diameter of the resonance circle to occur off of the real axis. Such an asymmetry may arise from a non-negligible line inductance or mismatched input/output impedance. To deduce the physical parameters of the gJJ from the fit parameters of the S 21 resonance feature, we employ an electrical impedance model of our device which takes the inputs (f 0 , Q i ) and numerically solves for junction parameters (I c , R SG ). Sonnet ® 15.53 is used to estimate the physical parameters of the NbTiN transmission line resonator [31] (See Table I). The coupling capacitance C C is estimated by fitting a set of resonances at V BG = -1.9 V, numerically solving for C C , and creating a histogram of extracted C C values with mode C c = 0.243 pF and standard deviation of approximately σ Cc = 0.02 pF.

# APPENDIX E: Discussion of Extracted Parameters from Resonance Fits and RSJ Model

As shown in Fig. 7, our fitting and modeling procedure allows several fit and junction parameters to be plotted as a function of backgate voltage V BG and flake temperature T mxc . Figure 7(a) shows a dip in Q i at V BG = -2V, which is propagated to the other plots Fig. 7(b-d). This dip arises from an asymmetry in the S 21 parameter which rotates the resonance circle off the real axis. Such rotations can arise from line impedance mismatches and parasitic couplings [30]. Since R SG is determined primarily by Q i , R SG is sensitive to dissipation in the graphene flake as well as the electromagnetic environment of the flake/resonator assembly. By contrast, f 0 and I c are largely insensitive to these effects, so our thermometry based upon the dispersive shifts of the resonance is also largely insensitive to these effects.

Figure 7(b) shows that our device for all backgate voltages is in the undercoupled limit (Q i < Q c ), where dissipation occurs primarily within device instead of via the coupling to the microwave lines. The variation of the coupling quality factor Q c is consistent with the circuit model and a constant coupling capacitor C c = 0.243 pF.

The dispersive shifts of the resonance can be understood from the impedance model shown in Fig. 6, which consists of a transmission line resonator terminated by the junction impedance. This model predicts an unloaded (L J = 0 nH) resonant frequency of f unload = 774.75 MHz as indicated by the solid red line in Fig. 7(f). When a finite inductance L J loads the transmission line resonator, the resonant frequency decreases. This occurs because a change in the terminating impedance alters the boundary condition at the terminating end of the resonator. In the case of the unloaded resonator, i.e. a λ/4 resonator, the termination is a short-to-ground, which fixes the boundary voltage at V = 0. This enforces the resonance condition that the length of the resonator equals one quarter of the resonant wavelength, i.e. λ/4 = l. However, terminating the transmission line resonator in an inductance alters the boundary condition such that the boundary voltage amplitude is fixed at some V = V 0 > 0. This has the effect of enforcing the resonance condition that a quarter-wavelength is larger than the resonator length, i.e. λ/4 > l, or, analogously, that the resonant frequency is decreased relative to the un-loaded case. The larger the terminating impedance, i.e. the larger L J , the lower the resonant frequency [6,31].

Due to higher contact transparency, electron doping should exhibit a larger supercurrent than hole doping. It follows that the electron side should exhibit a smaller L J than the hole side, and, correspondingly, the electron side should exhibit a smaller decrease in resonant frequency relative to f unload than the hole side. This is consistent with Fig. 7(f) for electron and hole doping, i.e. ∆f electron < ∆f hole where ∆f is defined as the resonant frequency decrease at T mxc = 160 mK.

Increasing the flake temperature further increases L J and decreases the resonant frequency. A rough estimate of the further decrease of the resonant frequency δf due to increased temperature is as follows:

As discussed in the section F, I c typically decreases by 20-30% as the flake temperature is increased from 160 mK to 400 mK. From the main text Fig. 3, Hole Side:

Electron Side:

The change in resonant frequency is therefore consistent with the typical change in I c (T ). We conclude that the greater magnitude of frequency decrease on the hole side relative to the electron side follows as a straightforward result of the greater inductive loading of the transmission line resonator.

As shown in Fig. 7(c), ω0L J R SG is a common figure-ofmerit for RF-driven Josephson junctions [32]. It compares the impedance of the dissipationless supercurrent branch to the dissipative resistive branch. A smaller value of ω0L J R SG denotes a less dissipative device. At T mxc = 160 mK, ω0L J R SG ≈ 1.5% within a factor of 2. As the temperature rises to T mxc = 400 mK, ω0L J R SG increases to 3%. This is consistent with decreases in I c raising the impedance of the dissipationless branch and driving more current through the dissipative branch, as indicated by the degrading quality factor with increasing flake temperature (see Fig. 2(c)). ometry. While they indeed occur, we note that the thermal conductance corresponding to these alternative pathways are all too small to explain our measurements.

# Thermalization via bulk phonons

The bulk phonons are often invoked as the main source of electron thermalization in graphene. However, besides having a different exponent (n = 3 or n = 4 not agreeing with our data, see Fig. 10), the cooling rate via bulk graphene phonons is too small to explain experimental findings. As discussed in previous literature, the typical thermal conductance expected from bulk phonons is two orders of magnitude smaller than the measured data. We note that, in this context of the overall cooling rate, our measurements are roughly in line with previous graphene-hBN experiments. Thermalization in Aluminum leads: Another possibility is that the hot electrons enter Al leads. While the tunneling of electrons (or holes) in a superconductor is expected to be suppressed due to the existence of a finite single-particle gap, previous work found that this process can still be sizable when using Aluminum electrodes. The critical distinction between our study and previous work using Aluminum contacts (see, for example, Ref. [35]), is that we used Al only as immediate contact to graphene (Fig. 11), and beyond that, the electrodes used in our experiment are made from Niobium Titanium Nitride (NbTiN) which has a much larger superconducting gap (∆ ≈ 1 meV). In this context, the amount of heat that could "leak" into Aluminum contacts is much lower compared to measured values of thermal conductance. A total volume of Aluminum in our device is only approximately V = 150 × 10 -18 m 3 . By considering the established value for electron-phonon coupling in Aluminum (Σ = 0.3 × 10 9 W/K 5 m 3 , see Ref. [36]) the corresponding P. vs T dependence is expected to follow P ≈ 0.98 × Σ × V × T 5 × exp(-∆/(kT )). Here ∆ ≈ 170 -200 µeV is Aluminum superconducting gap measured in our experiments and a numerical pre-factor of 0.98 is estimated in Ref. [37]. At T = 200 mK this rate corresponds to G = dP/dT = 0.25 × 10 -12 W, approximately two orders of magnitude smaller than the observed thermalization rates at our lowest temperatures. A key figure-of-merit for linear power detectors is noise-equivalent power (N EP ). A power-to-voltage detector has a responsivity R, such that

In the linear-response regime, i.e. for small applied power, this expression simplifies to A continuous-wave carrier tone at ωc is sent down a microwave line to the graphene device, amplified, and read out by a spectrum analyzer. An AC heater current at frequency ω = 2π × 337 Hz injects a 2ω heat power P heater in the graphene flake and produces 2ω amplitude modulation of the carrier tone, as discussed in (a). (c) Representative spectrum at output of measurement chain. Spectrum as read out by spectrum analyzer (RBW = 1 Hz) for applied heat power off (blue) and on (red). The primary effect of the applied heat is to produce sidebands spaced at 2ω from the the carrier tone. Other peaks in the spectrum exist at multiples of the line frequency. A peak at ω is consistent with a DC offset in the applied heat power. Inset shows the 2ω sideband. (d) Sideband Power vs. P heater . In the low-P heater linear-response regime, the sideband voltage V sb ∝ P heater . Since the spectrum analyzer reads out the sideband power, P sb ∝ P 2 heater , which is consistent with the slope at low P heater . (e) N EP vs. P heater . The linear-response regime is characterized by a regime of constant N EP , before rising as the amplitude modulation saturates to its maximal value. The N EP plotted in (g,f) corresponds to the linear response regime (green dashed line). (f, g) N EP vs. carrier power Pc and carrier frequency fc for (f) electron-side (VBG = 1.0 V) and (g) hole-side (VBG = -2.75 V). Minimal N EP occurs near the resonance dip minimum where amplitude modulation is largest. As carrier power Pc is increased, the resonance dip downshifts to lower frequencies and is driven into nonlinearity, as characterized by an asymmetric resonance lineshape with steep falling edge and shallow rising edge. The minimum N EP tracks the steep falling edge where amplitude modulation is greatest. FIG. 10. The fits for the electron and hole doping in different temperature ranges. Electron doping: Blue dashed line is the original full fit from 180 mK to 400 mK. Red is 300 mK to 400mK. Green is 330 mK to 400 mK. Hole doping: Red dashed line is the full data fit. Cyan is 300 mK-390 mK. Magenta is 330 mK-390 mK. For both electron and hole doping the n decreases (but stays well above n¿4) when part of the data is used for fitting. This indicates that n = 4or n = 3 power exponents are inadequate to describe our data. In this regime, the N EP of a power-to-voltage detector (in units of W √ Hz ) can be defined as that power spectral density at the device input which produces the measured voltage spectral density √ S V at the output:

The above expression suggests two immediate ways to measure the N EP . One is to measure the voltage spectral density √ S V at the output and the device responsivity ∂V out /∂P heater . Another is to measure the applied power at the input δP in , and the SN R at the output as suggested by rearranging the above expression

In the above equation, the SN R is in units of V V / √ Hz and P in = P heater /4. The latter expression is true since we have implicitly assumed P in is that input power that produces the measurable V out signal. In our case, only one quarter of the heat power P heater injected at the heater port produces the measured sideband signal.

# Experimental Design

To measure the N EP , we use the measurement setup in Fig. 9(a,b) and perform the following procedure:

• We apply a carrier tone on the microwave line (Fig. 9(a), first panel). The S 21 parameter is the transfer function which determines the magnitude and phase of the signal at the output. Thus, a carrier tone at the resonant frequency, i.e., at the maximal dip of the S 21 parameter will have a smaller transmitted magnitude than a carrier tone placed off-resonance.

• Measurement of P heater (ω) = I heater (ω) × V heater (ω) is achieved by sourcing a current I heater (ω) to the heater port and measuring the voltage drop V heater (ω) = I heater (ω)R heater over the heater port in a 4-wire lock-in measurement.

Since we apply an AC heater current I heater (ω) ∝ cos ωt, it follows that P heater (ω) ∝ cos 2 ωt = 1 2 (1 + cos(2ωt)). Only the 2ω term in the final expression contributes to the V out sideband signal.

• Applying an AC heat power P heater to the heater port modulates the S 21 parameter between unheated and heated states (Fig. 9(a), second panel). Consistent with the heating measurements performed in the main text, the heated state has a lower resonant frequency and lower quality factor than the unheated state. The 2ω component of the input power P heater modulates the flake temperature at 2ω. Thus, modulation of the S 21 resonance feature will occur at 2ω.

• Placing the frequency of the carrier tone within the bandwidth of the modulated S 21 resonance feature will amplitude modulate the carrier, producing sidebands spaced at 2ω from the carrier (Fig. 9(a), second and third panel). Provided that the device is in the linear-response regime, the voltage of the sidebands will increase in proportion to applied heat power, i.e. V sb ∝ P heater . It follows that the power of the sidebands will increase as P sb ∝ P 2 heater . • The amplitude-modulated carrier is read out by a spectrum analyzer (Fig. 9(a), third panel). The signal-to-noise ratio of the sideband is used to calculate the N EP . We note that only one sideband is used in the N EP measurement.

# Sideband Spectrum

In Fig. 9(c), we see that application of an AC heater current of magnitude I heater = 20 nA results in sidebands at 2ω offset from the carrier, where ω = 2π × 337 Hz. In addition to the 2ω sidebands, sidebands at multiples of the 60 Hz line frequency frequency are present. Additionally, there are sidebands at ω approximately 10 dB down from the 2ω sidebands. This can be explained by a small DC offset in the heater current.

With increasing heater power, the magnitude of the sidebands saturates at a value consistent with expectations. It is straightforward to show that a resonance dip of 3 dB generates a maximum amplitude modulation index m = 17%, which should produce sidebands 21 dB lower than the carrier. This is in agreement with the measured sideband magnitude that is 23 dB lower than the carrier.

# Sideband Scaling

In the linear response regime, V sb ∝ δP heater . Therefore, the sideband signal as measured on the spectrum analyzer (in power units) should scale as P sb ∝ P 2 heater , or by 20 dB/decade. This is seen in Fig. 9(d) for applied heat P heater in the range -120 dBm to -105 dBm, where the slope of fit at low-P heater is consistent with a scaling exponent n = 2. This confirms that our measurement is in linear-response regime at low P heater . For greater applied P heater , the sideband power saturates as the amplitude modulation reaches the full maximum of the resonance dip.

# NEP vs. P heater

In the linear response regime, the N EP is constant with respect to P heater since V sb ∝ P heater . This is shown Fig. 9e for P heater < -105 dBm. As stated above, the N EP rises for P heater > -105 dBm as the SN R saturates while P heater continues to increase.

# NEP vs. Carrier Frequency and Carrier Power

To explore the N EP as a function of the carrier tone, we generate a heat map with swept carrier frequency f c and carrier power P c (Fig. 9(f,g)). For the lowest carrier powers, the N EP is minimized for carrier frequencies close to the resonance minimum, where the responsivity of the resonance to applied heater power is greatest and therefore the amplitude modulation of the carrier is greatest. As the carrier power P c is increased, the junction is driven to nonlinearity, resulting in a resonance dip with a steep falling edge and a shallow rising edge. This has the effect of enhancing the N EP on the falling edge and reducing it on the rising edge. For carrier powers P c > -98 dBm, the quality factor of the resonance feature is degraded to such an extent that the amplitude modulation of sideband is reduced and the N EP increases. The N EP reaches a minimum value of 7 × 10 -17 W/ √ Hz for a carrier power P carrier = -102 dBm and carrier frequency f carrier = 753.5 MHz.

# Detection Limits

The measured minimum noise-equivalent power N EP min ≈ 7 × 10 -17 W/ √ Hz. It is limited by the noise of the 4K cryoamp and is ∼ 20× larger than the thermal fluctuation-limited N EP = √ 4k B T 2 G th at T mxc = 200 mK. At T mxc = 58 mK , the projected thermal fluctuation-limited N EP proj ≈ 1 × 10 -19 W/ √ Hz, assuming that the T 4 dependence of G th holds down to these temperatures [29,38] 

# APPENDIX G: Power vs. Temperature Fitting Procedure

To obtain the G th = ∂P ∂T vs. T in Fig. 4(c), we first perform piece-wise linear fits of the P -T curves of Fig. 4(a). Subsequently, we perform a nonlinear least squares fit of the G th vs. T to the fitting function

with free fit parameters n the scaling exponent and ΣA the electron-phonon coupling. The errors in the free fit parameters correspond to the 2σ (95%) errors obtained from the nonlinear least squares fit. On the electron side, we include an exclusion criteria at the limit of the temperature resolution of our device. This criteria does not appreciably change the extracted n or ΣA. Without the exclusion criteria the extracted fit parameters are n = 5.04 ± 0.2 and ΣA = (25.25 ± 6.89) × 10 -10 W/K 5 . With the exclusion criteria, the extracted fit parameters are n = 4.92 ± 0.14 and ΣA = (20.73 ± 3.90) × 10 -10 W/K 5 .

# APPENDIX H: Other thermalization pathways

In this section, we briefly discuss alternative thermalization pathways that can occur in our experimental ge-

