# Introduction

Detection of gradual wall thinning and crack-like defects in or close to welds is a serious challenge for conventional guided wave testing. It is also quite common for anomalies to develop in the areas hidden by pipe supports or wall penetrations, making detection of these anomalies impossible for conventional ultrasound. For these reasons, development of short and medium range guided wave testing methods is a high priority for many industrial applications [1]. Shear horizontal (SH) mode ultrasonic guided waves are being widely considered as a promising tool for fast screening of pipework for corrosion due to these waves' ability to travel relatively long distances with low dispersion and low attenuation.

One established approach to excite such waves in pipes uses a magnetostrictive sensor that combines a soft ferromagnetic ribbon material with a magnetic biasing field perpendicular to wave propagation direction [2]. An alternative magnetostrictive transducer (MsT) design was discovered in 2008 utilizes a magnetic biasing field parallel to the wave propagation direction [3][4][5]. Compared to previous designs, MsTs have the advantage of higher transduction efficiency due to better control over time varying and permanent magnetic biasing fields [6]. An additional advantage of these transducers is their capability to generate both transverse and compressional vibration by including coils wound along two different axes in each transducer [7].

The interaction of SH guided waves with wall thinning has been investigated by various researchers. Hirao and Ogi used the EMAT technique to generate SH guided waves, and related the depth of both disk-shaped and rectangular defects with the amplitude and phase of the SH0 and SH1 roundtrip signals [8]. Nakamura et.al. studied the mode conversion behaviour of SH guided waves in tapered plates [9] and later torsional guided waves in pipes [10]. They observed total transmission of SH0 mode and total reflection of SH1 mode at wall thinning with a flat bottom defect. Howard and Cegla used both Lamb waves and SH guided waves for detection of Hann profile corrosion [11]. They found the SH1 mode is sensitive to a much greater range of defects than the S0 mode in transmission. Recently, Kubrusly et.al. conducted a thorough investigation on SH guided waves with wall thinning with a flat bottom through experiment and finite element modelling [12]. They concluded that existing SH guided wave inspection is limited to screening measurements rather than detailed quantification.

In this paper, we report the usage of a newly designed linear scanning MsT transducer in rigid and flexible configurations. The transducer utilizes a FeCo strip of a predefined length wound with RF coils coupled to the testing structure using shear wave couplant. A permanent magnet is moved by a servo motor along the strip, thus generating and receiving SH guided waves from different positions. Manual manipulation of the probe is eliminated, increasing axial resolution and testing speeds. Scan data from various aperture sizes can be obtained with minimal effort by using magnets of different lengths. This paper reports on experimental investigations of the detection and quantification capability of the linear scanning MsT probe on gradual wall thinning and for detection of notches in seam welds. Several additional applications of flexible linear scan MsT probes are also discussed.

# Linear Scan MsT Probe

The key elements in MsT design are a solenoidal AC coil wrapped around the short dimension of a ferromagnetic ribbon and an array of low-profile permanent magnets. The ferromagnetic ribbon is made of Hiperco® 50 HS alloy annealed to produce uniform magnetic properties and to minimize residual magnetic bias. Figure 1a shows the conceptual design of a linear scan MsT. Control over the direction of guided waves is obtained using two coils separated by a quarter wavelength (λ/4) of the preferred wave mode and controlled phasing of the excitations. In actual transducer design, the ferromagnetic ribbon is encapsulated into a low-profile flexible casing. This casing is installed in a semi-rigid urethane frame, allowing fast transducer mounting/demounting. This casing also accommodates a servomotor and a belt drive providing incremental motion of the magnet. The ferromagnetic ribbon and frame were designed to be sufficiently flexible to fit on pipes with 259 mm and larger outer diameters (ODs). Figure 1b shows an example of the transducer mounted on a 406 mm OD pipe, Figures 1c and1d show examples of the transducer mounted for screening tank supports and tank walls. The existing system can perform automated scans of up to 660 mm in length with an axial resolution as high as 1 mm. The system setup time takes no more than 2 minutes on surfaces with moderate roughness. The linear scan MsT transducer can support test frequencies in the range of 20 -500 kHz. In the current configuration, it can control which direction that guided waves propagate (i.e., it can suppress guided wave propagation in an unwanted direction by reducing the signal amplitude by -25 dB to -12 dB) in the frequency ranges of 20 -90 kHz and 150 -250 kHz; outside of these frequency ranges, the system has reduced direction control. Shear wave couplant is used to acoustically couple the transducer to the tested structure. This system is suitable for testing structures fabricated using many different materials, such as magnetic and nonmagnetic metals or even composites. Two MsT linear scanning systems can be combined together to allow pitch catch operation, which would allow a great variety of guided wave-based tomography applications.

# Experiments with quantification of gradual wall loss on mockup

Initial experiments were conducted on a steel pipe of 406 mm OD and 10 mm wall thickness. The cut-off frequency for higher order SH modes for this thickness is 160 kHz.

Figure 2 shows the linear scanning MsT probe installed on the pipe; the guided wave propagation direction is labelled with an arrow. The permanent magnet used to generate SH guided waves has a length of 127 mm and a width of 12.5 mm. The scan increment was 12.5 mm. Two excitation signals were applied to generate pure SH0 and combined guided wave modes, respectively. The first is a 150 kHz, 1-cycle sinusoidal wave burst; the second is a 250 kHz, 5-cycle sinusoidal wave burst. The responses were recorded at a sampling frequency of 5 MHz, and five waveforms were averaged for each scan position. Five "V" shaped, 38 mm wide gradual wall thinning patches with depths of 10%, 18%, 28%, 36%, and 50%, were introduced by electrical discharge machining (EDM). The smoothness of thickness change is defined using the aspect ratio of the depth, d, to the bottom length, L, of the flaws. Along the wave propagation direction, the 50% deep patch has an aspect ratio of ~1:3, the 36% deep patch has an aspect ratio of 1:5, the 28% deep patch has an aspect ratio of 1:6, and the other two patches have aspect ratios of 1:10.

Figure 3a shows the B-scan image of guided wave responses using the 150 kHz excitation, where only the SH0 mode is generated. The color scale in the figure indicates the signal to noise ratio (SNR) in decibels (dB) using the averaged signal amplitude, with the yellow dashed box used as the reference level. No indications are apparent in the image of wall thinning at the anticipated areas, which are marked with white circles. This is as expected since the thickness changes are gradual, and thus total transmission of the SH0 mode is expected to occur. Figure 3b shows the B-scan image of guided wave responses using the 250 kHz excitation. For this inspection frequency, both the SH0 and SH1 modes are generated. The choice of 5 cycles in the transmitted pulse was made to separate the 1st round-trip signals of the SH1 mode from the 2nd round-trip signals of the SH0 mode. The group velocity of the SH1 mode is estimated as ~2.5 mm/μs using its 1st round-trip signal, which also matches the theoretical value of 2.48 mm/μs. The results of the test indicated that 50%, 36%, and 28% wall thinning patches are detectible with the reflected wave packets. The 18% patch is marginally detectible, while it is not clear if the 10% patch was detected. Furthermore, the wall thinning depth information can be obtained by comparing the amplitudes of the reflected wave packets from each patch, which increases with defect depth. SAFT imaging was also applied to the guided wave data acquired from the 250 kHz excitation to better concentrate the energy. As shown in Figure 3c, the SAFT image improves the SNR while reducing artifacts in the vicinity of defect indications. A slightly enhanced detection of the 18% wall thinning is also obtained. Overall, utilization of SH1 modes helped to improve detection capability for gradual wall loss defects. Based on modelling in CIVA, flaw depth quantification algorithms could be engaged in case if the morphology of anomaly is not altered and the depth is the only parameter changing [13].

# Detection of gradual wall loss in storage tank walls

Applicability of SH0 guided wave modes for detection of generalized corrosion in storage tanks with extended internal diameter (ID) corrosion was previously investigated as part of the development of the MsT360 omnidirectional probe [14]. During that effort, multiple corrosion areas were detected using 60 kHz SH0 guided waves. However, since SH0 modes are largely insensitive to gradual wall loss, additional scans of suspect areas were performed using linear scan MsT probe. Figure 4 shows a probe positioned on top of two areas of interest -a welded pipe support and known corrosion spot with measured wall loss up to 36%. The storage tank wall was 9.5 mm thick in the tested area, which implies an SH1 cutoff frequency of 168 kHz. The tank wall had localized pitting corrosion with clusters causing 5 -40% wall loss. A majority of the pitting clusters were visually identified from the inside and quantitatively characterized using manual ultrasonic gauges from the outside surface.

Figure 4b shows B-scan data acquired using a 100 kHz central frequency. Twenty-two incremental scans were made with a step increment 24.5 mm. As can be seen on the Bscan in Figure 4, some SH0 mode indications are apparent in the data at probe positions 1-9 (known corrosion spot area) and at probe positions 12 -20 (position of a tank support). The number and location of indications in the area with known corrosion could imply that there are 2 or 3 localized corrosion pits. Similar conclusions could be made regarding the area with the welded tank support. As a reference, an indication produced by a seam weld in the tank wall at 1.2 ms is shown on the plot (roughly 1.9 m distance from the probe, assuming the SH0 wave mode).

Figure 4c shows data acquired at a 170 kHz central frequency. Multiple SH1 mode indications are observed in both the 1-9 and 12-20 probe position regions, together with a few SH0 mode indications relevant either to welded line on top of tank support or to ID corrosion with sharper edges. The presence of multiple SH1 mode indications provided much more information about the morphology of the anomaly (four to five SH1 mode peaks could be counted as relevant to the area with known corrosion on plot 'c' compared to a few single indications on plot 'b'. It should be noted that due to the complex morphology of this corrosion spot, accurate quantification of remaining wall loss might be a formidable challenge.

# Detection of crack-like defects in or close to welds

Welds typically have wall cross-section changes that reflect some energy back to the probe. If a crack-like defect is hidden in the weld, indications produced by the weld and the defect will merge. If anomalies in welds are small, even multi-segment guided wave collars might not be able to detect such anomalies.

One way to detect anomalies in welds is to propagate guided waves at an angle other than straight at the weld (i.e., 0°). If the incident angle is in the range of 20 -30°, the bulk of the ultrasonic energy reflecting from the weld will not return to the transmitted transducer.

On the other hand, the anomalies with a length less than the wavelength will act like a point reflector [15]. Thus, a portion of the energy reflected from the flaw will return to the transducer. Utilizing this approach would require some flexibility in probe positioning in reference to the weld line. Figures 5a and 5b shows a rather simplistic example of detection of a 37 mm wide 30% deep notch in a seam weld of a tank bottom plate mockup.

The probe was oriented to direct a guided wave at a 25° angle to the seam weld. As a result, the seam weld by itself did not return any energy to the probe, and the notch was detected (see Figure 5b). Figure 5c shows a favourable probe placement for scanning of welded pipe supports based on this principle. a) b) c) 

# Conclusions

A linear scanning device based on rigid and flexible MsT technology was presented. This technology allows rapid collection of guided wave data over a large area. Automated data collection also supports collection of data in consistent manner, using multiple frequencies and a small step size. The resulting data can be processed using advanced SAFT algorithms.

In this paper the application of this probe for detection of gradual wall thinning defects was demonstrated on mockups and on actual storage tank walls with known corrosion damage. Detection of gradual wall thinning can be accomplished for short range application such as screening of pipe or tank supports, using circumferential or axial path guided waves. The principle of detection of crack-type defects hidden in seam welds was demonstrated using a skewed probe alignment. The physical flexibility of the linear scan MsT probe allows it to be installed on components with a wide range of surface geometries, to fit different size pipes and surface curvature. Future steps will include utilizing two linear scan MsT probes to operate in a through-transmission pitch catch mode to allow implementation of tomography algorithms.

