# DESCRIPTION

## CROSS-REFERENCE(S) TO RELATED APPLICATION(S)

This application claims the benefit of U.S. Provisional Application No. 63/108,217, filed Oct. 30, 2020, the disclosure of which is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety.

## STATEMENT OF GOVERNMENT LICENSE RIGHTS

This invention was made with Government support under GM074108 awarded by the National Institutes of Health. The Government has certain rights in the invention.

## BACKGROUND

Nucleosomes, the fundamental subunit of chromatin, consist of octamers of histones (H2A, H2B, H3, and H4) that wrap 147 bp of DNA. Single allele mutations in histones, termed “oncohistones”, are found in many different malignancies. Oncohistones comprise small percentages of the total histone pool and rarely cause cancer by themselves. Instead, they synergize with other oncogenes to facilitate development of neoplastic chromatin landscapes. Recent large-scale cancer genome analyses identified recurrent mutations in histones within the highly conserved histone fold domain (HFD) in many common cancers. These HFDs mutations, including the well-characterized H2B-E76K substitution, reduce nucleosome stability in vitro and perturb chromatin in vivo. Similarly, most H2A HFD oncohistone mutations disrupt either contact sites with DNA (R29Q) or inter-nucleosomal interactions (acidic patch) (FIG. 1A). Cells co-expressing H2B-E76K and a PI3KCA oncogene showed increased transformation capacity, consistent with nucleosome instability enhancing the cancerogenic potential of other oncogenes.

Short histone H2A variants (sH2A) are a class of histone variants expressed during mammalian spermatogenesis. Regulation of sH2A expression in normal testis is unknown. Unlike other histone variants, sH2As are rapidly evolving and possess highly divergent HFDs, mutated acidic patches and truncated C-termini, all of which impact nucleosome stability. The best characterized of these variants, H2A.B, forms unique nucleosomes that wrap ˜120 bp of DNA both in vitro and in vivo. In testis, H2A.B is incorporated into nucleosomes during meiosis and has been shown to interact with splicing factors at actively transcribed genes. Germline disruption of H2A.B-encoding genes in mice revealed that H2A.B loss is associated with chromatin dysfunction and splicing changes in testis.

Though a role for sH2As in cancer has yet to be determined, the emerging literature on nucleosome instability as a cancer driver along with H2A.B's potent ability to destabilize nucleosomes prompted the inventors to investigate whether sH2As can contribute to cancer. Previous work showed that expression of H2A.B causes increased sensitivity to DNA damaging agents, shortens S-phase and alters splicing, each of which are associated with oncogenesis. Additional evidence for a role for H2A.B in cancer comes from Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL), where, H2A.B transcripts have been detected and HL cells expressing H2A.B grow faster than H2A.B-negative cells. Here, through comparative analyses of germline short H2A sequences and oncohistone mutations in canonical H2A, short H2As were shown to inherently possess oncohistone features. Several cancer datasets were explored, and it was found that H2A.B is expressed in a diverse array of malignancies; and many of these cancers possess unique splicing signatures. The inventors propose that the nucleosome-destabilizing characteristics sH2As evolved for their role in testis result in oncohistone activity in other tissues.

Therefore, based on the knowledge that H2A.B is expressed in a variety of malignancies, a new need is revealed for the identification and treatment of H2A.B expressing malignancies. The present disclosure addresses these and related needs.

## SUMMARY

This summary is provided to introduce a selection of concepts in a simplified form that are further described below in the Detailed Description. This summary is not intended to identify key features of the claimed subject matter, nor is it intended to be used as an aid in determining the scope of the claimed subject matter.

Disclosed herein are embodiments of a method for treating a subject with lymphoma. In some embodiments, the method can comprise collecting a sample from a subject having or suspected of having lymphoma; detecting a short histone H2A variant (sH2A) expression level in the sample collected from the subject; and administering to the subject a therapeutically effective dose of an anthracycline agent, if the subject has sH2A variant expression level that is detectable.

In some embodiments, the sample can comprise blood, serum, plasma, or components thereof. In some embodiments, the sH2A variant can be the H2A.B variant. In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant has SEQ ID NO:3. In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant has a SEQ ID NO:4. In still other embodiments, the anthracycline agent can be selected from the group of daunorubicin, doxorubicin, epirubicin, idarubicin, mitoxantrone, valrubicin, and aclarubicin. In some embodiments, the anthracycline agent can be aclarubicin. In still other embodiments, the lymphoma can be Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Disclosed herein are embodiments of a method of inducing cytotoxicity in a lymphoma cell expressing a short histone H2A (sH2A) variant. In some embodiments, the method can comprise administering to a subject in need thereof a pharmaceutical composition comprising a therapeutically effective dose of an anthracycline agent.

In some embodiments, the subject can have Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some embodiments, the anthracycline agent can be selected from the group of daunorubicin, doxorubicin, epirubicin, idarubicin, mitoxantrone, valrubicin, and aclarubicin. In still other embodiments, the anthracycline agent can be aclarubicin. In some embodiments, the sH2A variant can be the H2A.B variant. In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant has SEQ ID NO:3. In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant has a SEQ ID NO:4. In still other embodiments, the H2A.B variant can be a protein encoded by histone H2A-Barr body-deficient type 1 (H2AFB1) (SEQ ID NO:25). In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant can be a protein encoded by histone H2A-Barr body-deficient type 2 (H2AFB2) (SEQ ID NO:26). In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant can be a protein encoded by histone H2A-Barr body-deficient type 3 (H2AFB3) (SEQ ID NO:27).

Disclosed herein are embodiments of a method to inhibit cancer cell proliferation. The method can comprise, collecting a sample from a subject having or suspected of having lymphoma; detecting a short histone H2A variant (sH2A) expression level in the sample collected from the subject; and administering to the subject a therapeutically effective dose of an anthracycline agent, if the subject has sH2A variant expression level that is detectable.

In some embodiments, the lymphoma can be selected from the group of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL), anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), and Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some embodiments, the lymphoma can be Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some embodiments, the sample can comprise blood, serum, plasma, or components thereof. In still other embodiments, the sH2A variant can be the H2A.B variant. In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant has SEQ ID NO:3. In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant has a SEQ ID NO:4. In some embodiments, the anthracycline agent can be selected from the group of daunorubicin, doxorubicin, epirubicin, idarubicin, mitoxantrone, valrubicin, and aclarubicin. In some embodiments, the anthracycline agent can be aclarubicin.

## DETAILED DESCRIPTION

Short H2A (sH2A) histone variants are primarily expressed in the testes of placental mammals. Their incorporation into chromatin is associated with nucleosome destabilization and modulation of alternate splicing. As described in more detail in Example 1, sH2As innately possess features similar to recurrent oncohistone mutations associated with nucleosome instability. Through analyses of existing cancer genomics datasets, aberrant sH2A upregulation is found in a broad array of cancers, which manifest splicing patterns consistent with global nucleosome destabilization. The inventors posit that short H2As are a novel class of “readymade” oncohistones, whose inappropriate expression contributes to chromatin dysfunction in cancer.

In accordance with the foregoing, in one aspect the disclosure provides for a method for treating a subject with lymphoma. As used herein, the term “lymphoma” refers to a cancer of the lymphatic system. Specifically, lymphoma can be a malignant growth of B or T cells in the lymphatic system. In some embodiments, the disclosed methods can be used to treat any of the large number of lymphomas. For example, specific embodiments of lymphoma include but are not limited to Hodgkin's lymphoma, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), and the like.

In preferred embodiments, the disclosed methods can be used to treat Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some embodiments, the Hodgkin's lymphoma is advanced Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some embodiments, the Hodgkin's lymphoma is metastatic Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some embodiments, the Hodgkin's lymphoma is MSI-H Hodgkin's lymphoma. In other embodiments, the Hodgkin's lymphoma is MSS Hodgkin's lymphoma. In still other embodiments, the Hodgkin's lymphoma is POLE-mutant Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some embodiments, the Hodgkin's lymphoma is POLD-mutant Hodgkin's lymphoma. In some embodiments, the Hodgkin's lymphoma is associated with homologous recombination repair deficiency/homologous repair deficiency (HRD).

In still other embodiments, the disclosed methods can be used for adult or childhood forms of lymphoma. In some embodiments, the disclosed methods can be used to treat lymphoma at any stage, e.g., stage I, II, III, or IV. The various types of lymphomas that can be treated with the disclosed methods are well known to those of skill in the art.

In some embodiments, the method can comprise collecting a sample from a subject having or suspected of having lymphoma; detecting a short histone H2A variant (sH2A) expression level in the sample collected from the subject; and administering to the subject a therapeutically effective dose of an anthracycline agent, if the subject has sH2A variant expression level that is detectable.

In some embodiments, the sH2A variant can be the H2A.B variant. In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant has amino acid sequence represented by SEQ ID NO:3. In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant has amino acid sequence represented by SEQ ID NO:4. In still other embodiments, the H2A.B variant is a protein encoded by histone H2A-Barr body-deficient type 1 (H2AFB1) (SEQ ID NO: 25). In some embodiments, the H2A.B variant is a protein encoded by histone H2A-Barr body-deficient type 2 (H2AFB2) (SEQ ID NO:26). In still other embodiments, the H2A.B variant is a protein encoded by histone H2A-Barr body-deficient type 3 (H2AFB3) (SEQ ID NO:27).

As used herein, the meaning of the terms “having” or “suspected of having” lymphoma is consistent with their ordinary usage as understood by one of ordinary skill in the art. For example, having lymphoma can mean but is not limited to one who is or has been diagnosed with a type of lymphoma. One who is suspected of having lymphoma can mean but is not limited to one who has symptoms of a type of lymphoma but has not been diagnosed.

In some embodiments, the sample can comprise blood, serum, plasma, or components thereof. In some embodiments, the blood sample can comprise a whole blood sample, or a blood fraction sample. In still other embodiments, the sample can comprise a tissue sample removed at surgery or by biopsy.

As used herein, detecting a short histone H2A variant (sH2A) expression level refers to identifying whether a sample collected from a subject has any level of expression of a sH2A variant, such as, for example, the H2A.B variant. As described in FIG. 9, H2A.B expression is limited to testis in normal cells, i.e., H2A.B is not expressed outside testis in non-malignant cells. In some embodiments, detecting an H2A.B expression level can comprise detecting any increase in H2A.B expression as determined by standard assays well known to one of ordinary skill in the art that can be used for quantifying histone expression. For example, it is well known that histone variants have been studied, both in vivo and in vitro, using a variety of techniques such as knock-down studies of the gene encoding a particular variant, differential gene expression and splice event analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation, stable isotope labeling of amino acids, quantitative mass spectrometry proteomics, immunohistochemistry, Western Blotting, RT-PCR, and Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbant Assay (ELISA).

As used herein, the phrase “sH2A variant expression level that is detectable,” refers to quantifying any amount of sH2A expression, such as the H2A.B variant, from a sample taken from a subject. The threshold for detection would depend on the method used to assay sH2A expression. For example, in some embodiments differential gene expression and splice event analysis can be used to detect H2A.B expression, wherein a threshold of >1.5 transcript per million (TPM) can be used to determine whether H2A.B can be expressed in a sample. In some embodiments, a threshold of <0.5 TPM can be used to determine whether H2A.B is not expressed in a sample. In still other embodiments, samples comprising a threshold between >0.5 TPM but <1.5 TPM would not be used in the analysis. For example, in still other embodiments, RT-PCR can be used to detect H2A.B expression, wherein a positive staining intensity can be used to determine that the sample expresses the H2A.B variant. In some embodiments, a negative staining intensity can be used to determine that the sample does not express the H2A.B variant. As used here, “positive” and “negative” staining intensity refer to the band intensity from, for example RT-PCR. Band intensity is determined by methods and standards well known to one of ordinary skill in the art.

One of ordinary skill in the art is well suited to identify the best method for detecting sH2A variant, e.g., H2A.B, expression in a sample taken from a subject. Additionally, based on the detection method used, one of ordinary skill in the art is well suited to identify the threshold for detection that would indicate that the H2A.B variant is expressed in a sample taken from a subject.

In some embodiments, if the subject has a detectable sH2A, e.g., H2A.B, expression level, as determined by one of ordinary skill in the art following any well-known method for assaying histone expression, that subject would be administered a therapeutically effective dose of an anthracycline agent. In some embodiments, if the subject has no detectable sH2A, e.g., H2A.B, expression level, as determined by one of ordinary skill in the art following any well-known method for assaying histone expression, that subject would not be administered a therapeutically effective dose of an anthracycline agent.

In some embodiments, the cytotoxic agent is an anthracycline agent. Anthracyclines are a class of drugs commonly used in cancer chemotherapy, which are also antibiotics. Structurally, all anthracyclines share a tetracyclic 7, 8, 9, 10-tetrahydrotetracene-5, 12-quinone structure and usually require glycosylation at specific sites. In some embodiments, anthracyclines refer to a class of compounds that share a tetracyclic 7, 8, 9, 10-tetrahydrotetracene-5, 12-quinone structure, including analogs and derivatives, pharmaceutically acceptable salts, hydrates, esters, conjugates, and prodrugs thereof.

Anthracyclines preferably undergo one or more of the following mechanisms of action: 1. inhibition of DNA and RNA synthesis by insertion between base pairs of the DNA/RNA strand, thereby preventing replication of rapidly growing cancer cells; 2. inhibition of topoisomerase II, preventing supercoiled DNA relaxation and thereby blocking DNA transcription and replication; 3. free oxygen radicals are generated which damage DNA and cell membranes mediated by iron; and 4. promote histone eviction, which is associated with attenuated DNA repair. In some embodiments, histone eviction deregulates the transcriptome in cancer cells and organs such as the heart and can drive apoptosis of topoisomerase-negative acute myeloid leukemia blasts in patients.

In some embodiments, examples of anthracyclines and anthracycline analogs include, but are not limited to, daunorubicin (daunorubicin), doxorubicin (adriamycin), epirubicin, idarubicin, daunorubicin, pyrarubicin (pyrarubicin), valrubicin, N-trifluoro-acetyl doxorubicin-14-valerate, aclarubicin, morpholino doxorubicin (morpholino-DOX), cyanomorpholino doxorubicin (cyanomorpholino-DOX), 2-pyrroline doxorubicin (2-PDOX), 5-iminodaunorubicin, mitoxantrone, aclarubicin A (aclarubicin), and the like.

In some embodiments, a therapeutically effective dose of an anthracycline agent can be any dose, as determined by one of ordinary skill in the art, that can be cytotoxic to the cancer cell. In some embodiments, the anthracycline agent can be administered as a single dose. In some embodiments, a single dose of an anthracycline agent can include but is not limited to between 40 to 75 mg/m2 given every 21 days. In some embodiments, one of ordinary skill in the art can determine the dose of an anthracycline agent that can provide for a specific plasma concentration. In some embodiments, a single dose can be administered that can provide for a specific concentration of at least 100 nM. In some embodiments, a single dose can be administered that can provide for a specific concentration of at least 500 nM. In some embodiments, a single dose can be administered that can provide for a specific concentration of at least 1 μM. In still other embodiments, a single dose can be administered that can provide for a specific concentration of at least 5 μM.

In some embodiments, the anthracycline agent can be administered as multiple divided doses based on a particular dosing schedule. One of ordinary skill in the art can determine the proper dosing schedule and adjust the dosing schedule to achieve the desired effect. In some embodiments, the dosing schedule can include but is not limited to 25 mg/m2 administered every other week for 12 weeks. In some embodiments, the dosing schedule can include but is not limited to 25 mg/m2 administered on day 1 and day 15 repeated every 28 days as needed.

In some embodiments, the anthracycline agent can be administered according to any route of administration as determined by one of ordinary skill in the art. In some embodiments, the route of administration can include but is not limited to injectable, intravenous, intraarterial, intravesical, and the like.

In another aspect, the disclosure provides for a method of inducing cytotoxicity in a lymphoma cell expressing a short histone H2A (sH2A) variant. In some embodiments, the method can comprise administering to a subject in need thereof a pharmaceutical composition comprising a therapeutically effective dose of an anthracycline agent.

As used herein, “cytotoxicity” refers to the toxicity cased due to the action of an anthracycline agent on a lymphoma cell.

In another aspect, the disclosure provides for a method to inhibit cancer cell proliferation. In some embodiments, the method can comprise, collecting a sample from a subject having or suspected of having lymphoma; detecting a short histone H2A variant (sH2A) expression level in the sample collected from the subject; and administering to the subject a therapeutically effective dose of an anthracycline agent, if the subject has sH2A variant expression level that is detectable.

As used herein, cancer cell proliferation refers to how quickly a cancer cell copies its DNA and divides into 2 cells. The faster a cancer cells divides, the faster the cancer cell is growing. Standards methods well-known to one of ordinary skill in the art can be used to assess cancer cell growth.

### Additional Definitions

Unless specifically defined herein, all terms used herein have the same meaning as they would to one skilled in the art of the present invention. Practitioners are particularly directed to Sambrook J., et al. (eds.), Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, 3rd ed., Cold Spring Harbor Press, Plainsview, N.Y. (2001); Ausubel, F. M., et al. (eds.), Current Protocols in Molecular Biology, John Wiley & Sons, New York (2010); Ran, F. A., et al., Genome engineering using the CRISPR-Cas9 system, Nature Protocols, 8:2281-2308 (2013), and Jiang, F. and Doudna, J. A., CRISPR-Cas9 Structures and Mechanisms, Annual Review of Biophysics, 46:505-529 (2017) for definitions and terms of art.

The use of the term “or” in the claims is used to mean “and/or” unless explicitly indicated to refer to alternatives only or the alternatives are mutually exclusive, although the disclosure supports a definition that refers to only alternatives and “and/or.”

Following long-standing patent law, the words “a” and “an,” when used in conjunction with the word “comprising” in the claims or specification, denotes one or more, unless specifically noted.

Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, throughout the description and the claims, the words “comprise,” “comprising,” and the like, are to be construed in an inclusive sense as opposed to an exclusive or exhaustive sense; that is to indicate, in the sense of “including, but not limited to.” Words using the singular or plural number also include the plural and singular number, respectively. Additionally, the words “herein,” “above,” and “below,” and words of similar import, when used in this application, shall refer to this application as a whole and not to any particular portions of the application. The word “about” indicates a number within range of minor variation above or below the stated reference number. For example, “about” can refer to a number within a range of 10%, 9%, 8%, 7%, 6%, 5%, 4%, 3%, 2%, or 1% above or below the indicated reference number.

The terms “subject,” “individual,” and “patient” are used interchangeably herein to refer to a mammal being assessed for treatment and/or being treated. In certain embodiments, the mammal is a human. The terms “subject,” “individual,” and “patient” encompass, without limitation, individuals having cancer. While subjects may be human, the term also encompasses other mammals, particularly those mammals useful as laboratory models for human disease, e.g., mouse, rat, dog, non-human primate, and the like.

The term “treating” and grammatical variants thereof may refer to any indicia of success in the treatment or amelioration or prevention of a disease or condition (e.g., a cancer, infectious disease, or autoimmune disease), including any objective or subjective parameter such as abatement; remission; diminishing of symptoms or making the disease condition more tolerable to the patient; slowing in the rate of degeneration or decline; or making the final point of degeneration less debilitating.

The treatment or amelioration of symptoms can be based on objective or subjective parameters; including the results of an examination by a physician. Accordingly, the term “treating” includes the administration of the compounds or agents of the present disclosure to prevent or delay, to alleviate, to improve clinical outcomes, to decrease occurrence of symptoms, to improve quality of life, to lengthen disease-free status, to stabilize, to prolong survival, to arrest or inhibit development of the symptoms or conditions associated with a disease or condition (e.g., a cancer), or any combination thereof. The term “therapeutic effect” refers to the reduction, elimination, or prevention of the disease or condition, symptoms of the disease or condition, or side effects of the disease or condition in the subject.

Reference to sequence identity addresses the degree of similarity of two polymeric sequences, such as nucleic acid or protein sequences. Determination of sequence identity can be readily accomplished by persons of ordinary skill in the art using accepted algorithms and/or techniques. Sequence identity is typically determined by comparing two optimally aligned sequences over a comparison window, where the portion of the peptide or polynucleotide sequence in the comparison window may comprise additions or deletions (i.e., gaps) as compared to the reference sequence (which does not comprise additions or deletions) for optimal alignment of the two sequences. The percentage is calculated by determining the number of positions at which the identical amino-acid residue or nucleic acid base occurs in both sequences to yield the number of matched positions, dividing the number of matched positions by the total number of positions in the window of comparison and multiplying the result by 100 to yield the percentage of sequence identity. Various software driven algorithms are readily available, such as BLAST N or BLAST P to perform such comparisons.

Publications cited herein and the subject matter for which they are cited are hereby specifically incorporated by reference in their entireties. The publication by Chew et al., entitled “Short H2A histone variants are expressed in cancer,” Nature Communications, 2021 Jan. 20; 12(1):490 and all of its figures, supplementary figures, supplementary tables, and supplementary data 1-7 are herein incorporated by reference.

### EXAMPLES

The following examples are set forth so as to provide those of ordinary skill in the art with a complete disclosure and description of how to make and use the present invention, and are not intended to limit the scope of what the inventors regard as their invention nor are they intended to represent that the experiments below are all or the only experiments performed.

**Example 1**

This Example describes that short H2A histone variants are expressed in cancer. Specifically, in this Example, specific embodiments are provided that describe aberrant sH2A upregulations were observed in a broad array of cancers, which manifest splicing patterns consistent with global nucleosome destabilization.

Results

sH2As have Evolved Oncohistone Features

There are five X-linked sH2A genes in humans: H2A.B.1.1 (H2AFB2), H2A.B.1.2 (H2AFB3), H2A.B.2 (H2AFB1), H2A.P (HYPM) and H2A.Q (unannotated) (Molaro, A., Young, J. M. & Malik, H. S. Evolutionary origins and diversification of testis-specific short histone H2A variants in mammals. Genome Res 28, 460-473 (2018)). The amino acid sequences of sH2As were compared to canonical H2A to assess whether their rapid evolution resulted in oncohistone-like changes. This analysis revealed that many of the most common cancer-associated mutations in canonical H2A are already present in all wildtype sH2A sequences (FIGS. 1A, 5A, and 5B). This includes R29Q/F substitutions that correspond to the second most frequent mutation in canonical H2A (FIGS. 1A, 5A, and 5B) (Bennett, R. L. et al. A Mutation in Histone H2B Represents a New Class of Oncogenic Driver. Cancer Discov (2019); Nacev, B. A. et al. The expanding landscape of ‘oncohistone’ mutations in human cancers. Nature 567, 473-478 (2019)). In addition, all wildtype sH2As have a C-terminal truncation that removes E121, the most common mutation in canonical H2A (FIGS. 1A, 5A, 5B) (Bennett, R. L. et al. A Mutation in Histone H2B Represents a New Class of Oncogenic Driver. Cancer Discov (2019); Nacev, B. A. et al. The expanding landscape of ‘oncohistone’ mutations in human cancers. Nature 567, 473-478 (2019)). Phylogenetic analyses in primates showed that despite their rapid evolution, these oncohistone-like changes are highly conserved (FIGS. 1B and 5A-5C) (Molaro, A., Young, J. M. & Malik, H. S. Evolutionary origins and diversification of testis-specific short histone H2A variants in mammals. Genome Res 28, 460-473 (2018)). This conservation implies functional consequences as many of these residues are critical contact points for histone-DNA or histone-histone interactions (Luger, K., Mader, A. W., Richmond, R. K., Sargent, D.F. & Richmond, T.J. Crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle at 2.8 A resolution. Nature 389, 251-60 (1997); Kohestani, H. & Wereszczynski, J. Effects of H2A.B incorporation on nucleosome structures and dynamics. bioRxiv, 2020.06.25.172130 (2020); Peng, J., Yuan, C., Hua, X. & Zhang, Z. Molecular mechanism of histone variant H2A.B on stability and assembly of nucleosome and chromatin structures. Epigenetics Chromatin 13, 28 (2020); Bao, Y. et al. Nucleosomes containing the histone variant H2A.Bbd organize only 118 base pairs of DNA. EMBO J 23, 3314-24 (2004); Doyen, C. M. et al. Dissection of the unusual structural and functional properties of the variant H2A.Bbd nucleosome. EMBO J 25, 4234-44 (2006)). These data show that sH2As contain oncohistone features similar to canonical H2A mutations in cancers.

H2A.Bs are Reactivated in a Broad Array of Cancers

The oncohistone properties inherent in sH2As indicate that they may play a role in cancer simply through upregulation. The inventors focused on expression of H2A.B paralogs, since they are well annotated and have been shown to impact both nucleosome stability and cell cycle progression (Sansoni, V. et al. The histone variant H2A.Bbd is enriched at sites of DNA synthesis. Nucleic Acids Res 42, 6405-20 (2014)). To investigate whether H2A.Bs are reactivated in different cancers, transcriptomic data was first used from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). This analysis showed that H2A.B paralogs are activated (at a threshold of >1.5 transcripts per million (TPM)) in numerous individual tumors across cancer types (FIG. 2A and Supplementary Data 1 and 2), but never in adjacent normal tissue (Supplementary Data 1), and very rarely (<1.5%) in non-testes tissue samples from the Genotype-Tissue Expression database (GTEx) (Table 1).

Table 1 lists numbers and percentages of samples with H2AFB1, H2AFB2, or H2AFB3 reactivation (expression >1.5 TPM) from the GTEx dataset of normal tissues, by various tissue types.

The range of expression varies widely, with H2A.B-encoding transcripts present at >100 TPMs in two specimens (Supplementary Data 2). Although many tumors reactivate H2AFB1 alone, most tumors that express H2AFB2 also express H2AFB3 (FIG. 2A). This finding may result from transcriptional co-regulation due to their genomic proximity (FIG. 6B) or inability to distinguish these near-identical paralogs by short read mapping (Molaro, A., Young, J. M. & Malik, H. S. Evolutionary origins and diversification of testis-specific short histone H2A variants in mammals. Genome Res 28, 460-473 (2018)). Despite their similarity, the inventors were able to distinguish these two genes in a few tumor samples (FIG. 2A).

Across the TCGA dataset, diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) showed the highest frequency of aberrant H2A.B expression at 50% (FIG. 2A). A recent analysis of DLBCL genomes identified five distinct molecular subtypes (Chapuy, B. et al. Molecular subtypes of diffuse large B cell lymphoma are associated with distinct pathogenic mechanisms and outcomes. Nat Med 24, 679-690 (2018)) including a favorable prognosis-germinal center (FP-GC) subtype associated with histone mutations. In some embodiments, it was determined whether H2A.B expression was restricted to the FP-GC subtype. In some embodiments, 37 DLBCL samples were queried for mutations associated with the FP-GC subtype including linker H1 and core histones, immune evasion genes, PI3K, NF-κB, and JAK/STAT/RAS pathway components (Chapuy, B. et al. Molecular subtypes of diffuse large B cell lymphoma are associated with distinct pathogenic mechanisms and outcomes. Nat Med 24, 679-690 (2018)). Twenty-five samples had a mutation in at least one of these genes (Supplementary Data 3), including 15 different samples with histone mutations (Supplementary Data 3). H2A.B was expressed in 13 samples with any FP-GC mutation, and in 6 of the 10 FP-GC samples without histone mutations (Supplementary Data 3). To contrast this with another DLBCL subtype, in some embodiments, H2A.B expression was analyzed in the poorer prognosis-germinal center subtype associated with mutations in chromatin modifiers EZH2, CREBBP, EP300, KMT2D and BCL11A mutations (Chapuy, B. et al. Molecular subtypes of diffuse large B cell lymphoma are associated with distinct pathogenic mechanisms and outcomes. Nat Med 24, 679-690 (2018)). Though the analysis did not identify any EZH2 mutations, 15 samples had mutations in at least one chromatin modifier gene. Nine of these samples also had H2A.B upregulation. These analyses indicate that H2A.B expression occurs in multiple DLBCL subtypes.

Other cancers in the TCGA dataset with H2A.B aberrant expression include uterine corpus endometrial carcinomas (UCEC) (9.5%), urothelial bladder carcinomas (BLCA) (4.7%), and cervical squamous cell carcinomas and endocervical carcinomas (CESC) (4.5%) (FIG. 2a). These same cancers were previously identified as having the highest frequencies of core histone mutations in the TCGA dataset, ranging from 5-8% (Bennett, R. L. et al. A Mutation in Histone H2B Represents a New Class of Oncogenic Driver. Cancer Discov (2019)). A few specimens were found with both recurrent H2A mutations and H2A.B expression (Supplementary Data 4), however, the low numbers of specimens that share both of these features hinders meaningful correlative analyses.

Upregulation of H2A.B in HL (Winkler, C. et al. Hodgkin's lymphoma RNA-transfected dendritic cells induce cancer/testis antigen-specific immune responses. Cancer Immunol Immunother 61, 1769-79 (2012)) and DLBCLs (FIG. 2A) prompted analysis of datasets from other lymphoid lineage-derived, low mutation cancers for aberrant H2A.B expression. Four separate B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) datasets were queried and found 6-7% of specimens with H2A.B-encoding transcripts at >1.5 TPM (FIG. 2B) in three of the datasets (Liu, Y. F. et al. Genomic Profiling of Adult and Pediatric B-cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia. EBioMedicine 8, 173-183 (2016); Qian, M. et al. Whole-transcriptome sequencing identifies a distinct subtype of acute lymphoblastic leukemia with predominant genomic abnormalities of EP300 and CREBBP. Genome Res 27, 185-195 (2017); Yasuda, T. et al. Recurrent DUX4 fusions in B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia of adolescents and young adults. Nat Genet 48, 569-74 (2016)), and 13% in the fourth (Supp. FIG. 2c) (Lilljebjorn, H. et al. Identification of ETV6-RUNX1-like and DUX4-rearranged subtypes in pediatric B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Nat Commun 7, 11790 (2016)). Because of the diversity of liquid and solid cancers with H2A.B expression, we searched the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) database (Barretina, J. et al. The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature 483, 603-7 (2012)) was searched for cell lines with H2A.B expression at >1.5 TPM. Consistent with high frequency H2A.B expression in TCGA DLBCLs, lymphomas demonstrated the highest percentage of H2A.B-positive cell lines (FIG. 2C), with 70% of Hodgkin's lymphoma and 25% of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma cell lines expressing H2A.B. The spectrum of H2A.B expression across other cancers was also similar between CCLE and TCGA datasets (FIG. 2C). From these results, it can be concluded that H2A.B is aberrantly expressed in a broad array of cancers.

In some embodiments, the potential causes of H2A.B induction in cancer was investigated. While little is known about the transcriptional regulation of H2A.B-encoding loci in testis, changes in X-chromosome ploidy are associated with increased fitness in cancer cells (Xu, J. et al. Free-living human cells reconfigure their chromosomes in the evolution back to uni-cellularity. Elife 6 (2017). In some embodiments, investigation of whether H2A.B expression in cancer may result from global derepression of large domains, amplifications, or gain of an additional X chromosome in these samples. In some embodiments, levels of X—was compared to autosome-linked transcripts in H2A.B-expressing and silent samples and found no significant differences (FIG. 6A). In some embodiments, the expression profiles of individual H2AFB loci and their surrounding regions was investigated, and from this investigation, it was found that upregulation was limited to each individual H2A.B-encoding locus without upregulation of neighboring loci (FIG. 6B). These results are consistent with findings in the TCGA dataset, where median H2A.B expression for the 232 H2A.B-positive samples is approximately 3 TPM (Supplementary Data 2), corresponding to 49th percentile of all expressed genes. This level of expression is more likely the result of local, specific activation of individual H2AFB paralogues than recurrent amplifications or broader X-chromosome dysfunction.

H2A.Bs are Associated with Cancer-Specific, Rather than Pan-Cancer Gene Expression Programs

H2A.B proteins encoded by H2AFB1 and H2AFB2/3 are nearly identical in sequence. Nevertheless, the independent reactivation of H2AFB1 and H2AFB2/3 in different cancer specimens raised the possibility that these closely-related paralogues may be associated with distinct global gene expression programs. To explore this, in some embodiments, transcriptomes were compared from H2AFB1-reactivated samples versus those from H2AFB2/3-reactivated samples within the same cancer types. From the comparison, it was found that thousands of genes that were commonly up- or down-regulated in UCEC, HNSC, LUSC and BLCA (FIG. 3A), suggesting that different H2A.B paralogues operate in similar gene expression contexts.

In some embodiments, it was investigated whether expression of other genes was consistently associated with H2A.B expression. In this investigation, it was found that 146 genes were upregulated and 90 downregulated across H2A.B-positive cancers (Supplementary Data 5). Further, this investigation did not identify co-upregulation of other testis-specific histone variants such as H2A.1 (TH2A) or H2B.1 (TH2B) (Hoghoughi, N., Barral, S., Vargas, A., Rousseaux, S. & Khochbin, S. Histone variants: essential actors in male genome programming. J Biochem 163, 97-103 (2018)) (Supplementary Data 5) in H2A.B-expressing cancers. Three histone variants with broad tissue distributions, H2A.Z, H2A.X and H3.3, also did not show consistent differences between H2A.B-positive and negative cancers, except for lower H2A.Z and H2A.X in UCEC (FIG. 3B). H2A.X levels, it should be noted, are similar to maximum values for H2A.B (FIG. 3B, Supplementary Data 1). In some embodiments, expression of the histone chaperone NAP1 was examined, which can assemble H2A.B-containing nucleosomes (Bao, Y. et al. Nucleosomes containing the histone variant H2A.Bbd organize only 118 base pairs of DNA. EMBO J 23, 3314-24 (2004); Martire, S., Nguyen, J., Sundaresan, A. & Banaszynski, L.A. Differential contribution of p300 and CBP to regulatory element acetylation in mESCs. BMC Mol Cell Biol 21, 55 (2020)). NAP1-encoding transcripts were detected in all TCGA cancers, with DLBCLs expressing the highest levels (FIG. 3B, Table 2).

The chromatin consequences of this correlation i.e., whether higher NAP1 levels result in increased incorporation of H2A.B in chromatin are unknown.

The inventors noted that 12/146 of the commonly-upregulated genes are Cancer-Testis Antigens. Since H2AFB1 was previously shown to be co-expressed with a subset of Cancer-Testis Antigens (CTAs) in HL (Winkler, C. et al. Hodgkin's lymphoma RNA-transfected dendritic cells induce cancer/testis antigen-specific immune responses. Cancer Immunol Immunother 61, 1769-79 (2012)), it was determined whether H2A.B-reactivated cancers are generally associated with CTA upregulation. The expression of individual CTAs was summarized into a composite “CTA score” for each tumor and compared scores between H2A.B-reactivated and silent samples (FIG. 3C). Although H2A.B-expressing HNSCs, LUSCs and UCECs showed statistically significant CTA enrichment, DLBCLs and SARCs did not (FIG. 3C). In some embodiments, the four B-ALL datasets were examined and found that H2A.B expression was associated with CTA upregulation (FIG. 3C). However, individual CTAs such as NY-ESO-1 (CTAG1B) and CT45A5 were variably expressed across cancers (Supplementary Data 5), consistent with well-recognized transcriptional heterogeneity of this class of genes (Fratta, E. et al. The biology of cancer testis antigens: putative function, regulation and therapeutic potential. Mol Oncol 5, 164-82 (2011); Whitehurst, A. W. Cause and consequence of cancer/testis antigen activation in cancer. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 54, 251-72 (2014)). These data indicate that H2A.B expression is associated with CTA expression in several cancer types.

CTAs are subject to endogenous immunosurveillance mechanisms (Winkler, C. et al. Hodgkin's lymphoma RNA-transfected dendritic cells induce cancer/testis antigen-specific immune responses. Cancer Immunol Immunother 61, 1769-79 (2012)) and TCGA tumor samples are known to contain variable amounts of immune infiltrates (Corces, M. R. et al. The chromatin accessibility landscape of primary human cancers. Science 362 (2018)). In some embodiments, it was investigated whether H2A.B expression was associated with immune infiltrates, as this could confound our transcriptome analyses. It was found that transcript levels for markers of B-cells, T-cell subsets, NK cells, monocytes and activated macrophages did not show consistent enrichment across H2A.B-expressing tumors (FIG. 7). In fact, UCEC displayed a statistically significant decrease in PRF1 expression as well as several macrophage and neutrophil markers. Several sH2A-derived peptides are predicted to bind HLA molecules (Lundegaard, C. et al. NetMHC-3.0: accurate web accessible predictions of human, mouse and monkey MHC class I affinities for peptides of length 8-11. Nucleic Acids Res 36, W509-12 (2008); Nielsen, M. et al. Reliable prediction of T-cell epitopes using neural networks with novel sequence representations. Protein Sci 12, 1007-17 (2003)) (Supplementary Data 6), suggesting an immunosuppressive microenvironment may contribute to sustained H2A.B expression in UCEC. The lack of excess immune infiltrates in H2A.B-positive TCGA specimens and the identification of H2A.B-positive cancer cell lines (FIG. 2C) support H2A.B upregulation in cancer cells, though a contribution from surrounding stroma in patient specimens cannot be excluded.

H2A.B-Expressing Cancers have Distinct Splicing Patterns

H2A.B has been shown to directly bind RNA and interacts with splicing factors, and H2A.B expression impacts alternative splicing patterns (Tolstorukov, M. Y. et al. Histone variant H2A.Bbd is associated with active transcription and mRNA processing in human cells. Mol Cell 47, 596-607 (2012); Anuar, N. D. et al. Gene editing of the multi-copy H2A.B gene and its importance for fertility. Genome Biol 20, 23 (2019); Soboleva, T. A. et al. A new link between transcriptional initiation and pre-mRNA splicing: The RNA binding histone variant H2A.B. PLoS Genet 13, e1006633 (2017); Hoghoughi, N., Barral, S., Vargas, A., Rousseaux, S. & Khochbin, S. Histone variants: essential actors in male genome programming J Biochem 163, 97-103 (2018 Sansoni, V. et al. The histone variant H2A.Bbd is enriched at sites of DNA synthesis. Nucleic Acids Res 42, 6405-20 (2014)). To determine if H2A.B expression is associated with splicing dysregulation, all constitutive and alternative splicing events in the transcriptomes of H2A.B-reactivated and silent tumors from the TCGA dataset were annotated and quantified. Thousands of altered splicing events were uncovered between these cancers (FIGS. 4A and 4B). It was found that H2A.B expression is associated with reduced utilization of alternative “cassette exons” (se) and proximal alternative 3′ polyadenylation (APA) sites (FIGS. 8A and 8B). These features were particularly prominent in BLCA, SARC and UCEC (FIGS. 4A and 8A). While the changes are individually modest (FIGS. 8C-8F and Supplementary Data 7), they are widespread, i.e., significant changes were observed at thousands of sites across multiple cancer types (FIGS. 4A and 4B). These patterns are not H2A.B paralogue-specific, as similar patterns were observed in specimens expressing either H2AFB1 or H2AFB2/3 (FIGS. 8A and 8B).

In some embodiments, splicing in the four B-ALL datasets was explored. Unlike in myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myelogenous leukemias (AMLs) (Dvinge, H., Kim, E., Abdel-Wahab, O. & Bradley, R. K. RNA splicing factors as oncoproteins and tumour suppressors. Nat Rev Cancer 16, 413-30 (2016)), B-ALLs are not associated with mutations in splicing factors and global splicing dysregulation is not thought to be a major driver of these leukemias. When splicing patterns were compared in the H2A.B-reactivated and silent samples within each dataset, aberrant splicing was observed at a scale similar to that seen in H2A.B-positive TCGA cancers, with reductions in alternative exon and APA usage. However, the most notable feature is a consistent decrease in retained introns “ri” in all four datasets (FIG. 4C). From these observations, it was concluded that H2A.B expression is associated with splicing dysfunction, with some features common among many cancers while others occur in a context-specific manner

Discussion

The discovery of oncohistone mutations has revealed new insights into the biology of cancer. In this Example, it was disclosed that all mammalian genomes already encode sH2A histone variants that have evolved nucleosome-destabilizing features without any additional coding mutations. These features are important for sH2As' roles in normal testis physiology but result in oncohistone properties when expressed out of context. In this manner, they are similar to CATACOMB/EZHIP (Piunti, A. et al. CATACOMB: An endogenous inducible gene that antagonizes H3K27 methylation activity of Polycomb repressive complex 2 via an H3K27M-like mechanism. Sci Adv 5, eaax2887 (2019); Jain, S.U. et al. PFA ependymoma-associated protein EZHIP inhibits PRC2 activity through a H3 K27M-like mechanism. Nat Commun 10, 2146 (2019)), another testis-specific oncohistone mimic that inhibits EZH2 in a subset of rare malignancies. Unlike CATACOMB/EZHIP, however, H2A.B expression occurs in many common cancers. The diversity of H2A.B-expressing cancer types suggests that pathological histone dynamics play a more significant role in neoplasia than previously appreciated.

The precise molecular targets of H2A.B expression in cancers are not known. Relatively few genes are commonly-dysregulated across H2A.B-positive malignancies (Supplementary Data 5), implying that H2A.B impacts different genes in different cancers. As nucleosomes protect DNA from inappropriate transcription factor (TF) binding, nucleosome instability may allow oncogenic TFs access to different regulatory elements depending on cancer type (Bennett, R. L. et al. A Mutation in Histone H2B Represents a New Class of Oncogenic Driver. Cancer Discov (2019); Sarthy, J. F., Henikoff, S. & Ahmad, K. Chromatin Bottlenecks in Cancer. Trends Cancer 5, 183-194 (2019)). Nucleosome destabilization also hastens RNA pol II elongation, which in turn reduces transcription-coupled splicing efficiency (Jimeno-Gonzalez, S. et al. Defective histone supply causes changes in RNA polymerase II elongation rate and cotranscriptional pre-mRNA splicing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112, 14840-5 (2015)). Alternative exons and proximal polyadenylation sequences are preferentially impacted by inefficient splicing due to their weaker splice signals, resulting in a splicing phenotype similar to those observed in several H2A.B-positive cancers (Jimeno-Gonzalez, S. et al. Defective histone supply causes changes in RNA polymerase II elongation rate and cotranscriptional pre-mRNA splicing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112, 14840-5 (2015)). As some alternative exons promote mRNA degradation by targeting them for nonsense mediated decay, even modest reductions in alternative splicing can increase oncogene expression (Thomas, J. D. et al. RNA isoform screens uncover the essentiality and tumor-suppressor activity of ultraconserved poison exons. Nat Genet 52, 84-94 (2020)). H2A.B may operate at the nexus of several processes that cooperate to drive oncogenesis.

The relationship between histone dynamics, transcription and splicing may also explain our inability to detect a splicing phenotype in DLBCLs despite high frequency H2A.B expression. Many chromatin proteins are deranged in DLBCLs including Myc, p300, H1 linker and core histones, each of which can also impact alternative splicing (Chapuy, B. et al. Molecular subtypes of diffuse large B cell lymphoma are associated with distinct pathogenic mechanisms and outcomes. Nat Med 24, 679-690 (2018); Koh, C. M. et al. MYC regulates the core pre-mRNA splicing machinery as an essential step in lymphomagenesis. Nature 523, 96-100 (2015); Siam, A. et al. Regulation of alternative splicing by p300-mediated acetylation of splicing factors. RNA 25, 813-824 (2019); Glaich, O., Leader, Y., Lev Maor, G. & Ast, G. Histone H1.5 binds over splice sites in chromatin and regulates alternative splicing. Nucleic Acids Res 47, 6145-6159 (2019). Whether potential similarities between HFD-mutant cancers and H2A.B-expressing cancers extend to prognoses and vulnerabilities merits further investigation particularly in the context of DLBCL where larger data sets are needed to dissect these relationships. Several cell lines show sensitivity to H2AFB/-gRNAs in the Sanger Cancer Dependency Map, with lymphoma-derived cell lines SU-DHL-8 and IM9 being among the most sensitive to H2AFB1 disruption (Behan, F. M. et al. Prioritization of cancer therapeutic targets using CRISPR-Cas9 screens. Nature 568, 511-516 (2019)). Better characterization of histone mutations and H2A.B expression across cancer cell lines is needed in order to probe for similarities between H2A.B-expressing cancers and histone mutant cancers. Finally, sH2A-derived short peptides that bind human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules (Supplementary Data 6) may be useful immunotherapy targets, and global splicing dysregulation can also generate highly immunogenic neoantigens (Shen, L., Zhang, J., Lee, H., Batista, M. T. & Johnston, S.A. RNA Transcription and Splicing Errors as a Source of Cancer Frameshift Neoantigens for Vaccines. Sci Rep 9, 14184 (2019)). Thus, our discovery of sH2A-expressing cancers may open new avenues of study and treatment for hundreds of thousands of cancer cases worldwide.

Methods

Alignments of sH2A Sequences

sH2A and other H2A sequences were retrieved from Histone DB v2 (Draizen, E. J. et al. HistoneDB 2.0: a histone database with variants—an integrated resource to explore histones and their variants. Database (Oxford) 2016 (2016)) and previously published work (Molaro, A., Young, J. M. & Malik, H. S. Evolutionary origins and diversification of testis-specific short histone H2A variants in mammals. Genome Res 28, 460-473 (2018)). Predicted protein sequences from annotated CDS were aligned using ClustalW and manually curated. For primate alignments, sequences were arranged according to the accepted species phylogeny.

Genome annotation, RNA-seq read mapping, and gene and isoform expression estimation. RNA-seq reads from TCGA were downloaded from CGHub. Reads were processed for gene expression and splice isoform ratio quantification as previously described (Katz, Y., Wang, E. T., Airoldi, E. M. & Burge, C. B. Analysis and design of RNA sequencing experiments for identifying isoform regulation. Nat. Methods 7, 1009-1015 (2010)). Briefly, read alignment and expression estimation were performed with RSEM v1.2.443 (Li, B. & Dewey, C. N. RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with or without a reference genome. BMC Bioinformatics 12, 323 (2011)), Bowtie v1.0.044 (Langmead, B., Trapnell, C., Pop, M. & Salzberg, S. L. Ultrafast and memoryefficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol. 10, R25 (2009).), and TopHat v2.1.145 (Trapnell, C., Pachter, L. & Salzberg, S. L. TopHat: discovering splice junctions with RNA-Seq. Bioinformatics 25, 1105-1111 (2009)), using the hg19/GRCh37 assembly of the human genome with a gene annotation that merges the UCSC known Gene gene annotation (Meyer, L. R. et al. The UCSC Genome Browser database: extensions and updates 2013. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D64-D69 (2013)), Ensembl v71.1 gene annotation (Flicek, P. et al. Ensembl 2013. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D48-D55 (2013)), and MISO v2.0 isoform annotation (Katz, Y., Wang, E. T., Airoldi, E. M. & Burge, C. B. Analysis and design of RNA sequencing experiments for identifying isoform regulation. Nat. Methods 7, 1009-1015 (2010)). MISO v2.038 was used to quantify isoform ratios. The trimmed mean of M values (TMM) method (Robinson, M. D. & Oshlack, A. A scaling normalization method for differential expression analysis of RNA-seq data. Genome Biol. 11, R25 (2010)), as applied to coding genes, was used to normalize gene expression estimates across all of TCGA.

Data analysis and visualization. Data analysis was performed in the R programming environment and relied on Bioconductor (Huber, W. et al. Orchestrating high-throughput genomic analysis with Bioconductor. Nat. Methods 12, 115-121 (2015)), dplyr (Wickham, H., Francois, R., Henry, L., Muller, K. dplyr: A G 0.7.6 https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=dplyr. (2018)), and ggplot2 (Wickham, H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis., (Springer-Verlag, New York, N.Y., 2016))

RNA-seq coverage plots. RNA-seq coverage plots (i.e., FIGS. 8C to 8F) were made using the ggplot2 package in R, and represent reads normalized by the number of reads mapping to all coding genes in each sample (per million).

Somatic mutation analysis. TCGA somatic mutation calls from the Mutect pipeline (Cibulskis, K. et al. Sensitive detection of somatic point mutations in impure and heterogeneous cancer samples. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 213-219 (2013)), were obtained using the GDCquery_Maf function from TCGAbiolinks (Colaprico, A. et al. TCGAbiolinks: an R/Bioconductor package for integrative analysis of TCGA data. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, e71 (2016)). Mutations in the following canonical histones were collated by their class: H2A-HIST1H2A(A/B/C/D/E/G/H/I/J/K/L/M), HIST2H2A(B/C), HIS3H2A; H2B-HIST1H2B (A/B/C/D/E/F/G/H/I/J/K/L/M/N/O), HIST2H2B(E/F), HIST3H2BB. Recurrent mutations (Supplementary Data 3) are defined as occurring at least 5 times across all cancer types in TCGA (e.g. 10 instances of E121Q mutations are found in various H2As across all TCGA samples).

Differential gene expression and splice event analyses. For the purposes of differential analyses, a threshold of >1.5 transcripts-per-million (TPM) was used to determine if H2A.B was expressed in a sample, while a threshold of <0.5 TPM was used to determine if H2A.B was not expressed; samples with an intermediate expression of H2A.B were not used in differential analyses. Statistical significance in differential expression or splicing in H2A.B-positive versus H2A.B-negative cancer samples was determined with a Mann-Whitney test, as implemented in wilcox.test in R.

Prediction of H2A variant candidate T cell epitopes. The amino acid sequence of human H2A.B.1.1_H2AFB2, H2A.B.1.2_H2AFB3, H2A.B.2_H2AFB1, H2A.Q and H2A.P_HYPM were examined for short peptides with the potential to bind to common HLA alleles (Lundegaard, C. et al. NetMHC-3.0: accurate web accessible predictions of human, mouse and monkey MHC class I affinities for peptides of length 8-11. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, W509-W512 (2008); Nielsen, M. et al. Reliable prediction of T-cell epitopes using neural networks with novel sequence representations. Protein Sci. 12, 1007-1017 (2003). Specifically, the NetPanMHCBA4.0 algorithm of the Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource (IEDB) was used to identify peptides of 8, 9, 10 or 11 amino acids long that are predicted to bind with strong affinity (IC50<300 nM) to HLA-A*0101, A*0201, A*0301, A*1101, A*2402, B*0702, B*0801, B*1501, B*1502, B*4001, B*4002, B*4402 or B*4403. Additional IEDB algorithms were employed to confirm predicted HLA binding, whereby binding was predicted by NetPanMHCBA4.0 and at least one other method (including Artificial neural network (ANN), Stabilized matrix method (SMM), PickPocket and NetPanMHCBA4.0) was required for inclusion in Supplementary Data 6.

**Example 2**

This Example describes that the H2A.B variant is primarily expressed in testis in normal cells, i.e., non-malignant cells.

The H2A.B variant is encoded by three paralogues on the X-chromosome, H2AFB1, H2AFB2, and H2AFB3 (Molaro, A., Young, J. M. & Malik, H. S. Evolutionary origins and diversification of testis-specific short histone H2A variants in mammals. Genome Res 28, 460-473 (2018)). By probing large-scale transcriptomic datasets from cancer specimens and healthy controls, it was found that H2A.B is not expressed in normal tissue outside of testis, but is expressed in a broad array of solid and liquid malignancies (Chew, G. L. et al. Short H2A histone variants are expressed in cancer. Nat Commun 12, 490 (2021)). The inventors confirmed these findings by using RT-PCR in a panel of healthy tissues (FIGS. 9A and 9B). In some embodiments, H2A.B expression was identified in 50% of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and 10% of uterine carcinomas in The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset. Given the high prevalence of H2A.B expression in DLBCL, B-acute lymphoblastic lymphoma datasets were then probed and this analysis identified expression in 5-10% of B-ALL specimens (Chew, G. L. et al. Short H2A histone variants are expressed in cancer. Nat Commun 12, 490 (2021)). To confirm that H2A.B expression was occurring in cancer cells and not adjacent tissue, a comprehensive analyses of markers associated with immune infiltrates was performed and from this analysis there was no finding of overrepresentation of any marker in H2A.B-positive cancer specimens (Chew, G. L. et al. Short H2A histone variants are expressed in cancer. Nat Commun 12, 490 (2021)). In some embodiments, expression in cancer cells was tested by exploring the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE), where dozens of H2A.B-positive cell lines were found with lymph-derived cancers having highest expression. H2A.B expression was confirmed in L-428, L-1236 HL, SU-DHL-1, SUPM2 ALCL, and SU-DHL-8 DLBCL lines by RT-PCR, including an additional 15 lymphoma cell lines with H2A.B expression >1.5 transcripts per million that will be verified by RT-PCR (data not shown).

**Example 3**

This Example describes that loss of H2A.B expression inhibits cancer cell proliferation.

To determine whether H2A.B expression is consequential in cancer cells, two separate genome-wide CRISPR screens were performed to target H2A.B expression (Meyers, R. M. et al. Computational correction of copy number effect improves specificity of CRISPR-Cas9 essentiality screens in cancer cells. Nat Genet 49, 1779-1784 (2017); Reddy, A. et al. Genetic and Functional Drivers of Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma. Cell 171, 481-494 e15 (2017)). In one screen with 323 different cancer cell lines, the cell line with the most significant fitness reduction in response to H2A.B-targeting gRNAs was SU-DHL-8, a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell line (Meyers, R. M. et al. Computational correction of copy number effect improves specificity of CRISPR-Cas9 essentiality screens in cancer cells. Nat Genet 49, 1779-1784 (2017)). In a separate DLBCL-specific study, H2A.B-targeting gRNAs were a dependency in several cell lines (Reddy, A. et al. Genetic and Functional Drivers of Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma. Cell 171, 481-494 e15 (2017)). The only other H2A histone variant that showed similar dependency scores in both studies was H2A.Z, a variant deposited at sites of nucleosome turnover that was previously shown to promote oncogenesis (Valdes-Mora, F. et al. Acetylated histone variant H2A.Z is involved in the activation of neo-enhancers in prostate cancer. Nat Commun 8, 1346 (2017); Valdes-Mora, F. et al. Acetylation of H2A.Z is a key epigenetic modification associated with gene deregulation and epigenetic remodeling in cancer. Genome Res 22, 307-21 (2012)). Because of the high similarity between H2AFB1, H2AFB2 and H2AFB3, it is possible that the CRISPR results were in part mediated by inducing DNA breaks at all 3 H2A.B-encoding paralogues on the X-chromosome. To bypass this issue, a published shRNA was tested against H2A.B (Tolstorukov, M. Y. et al. Histone variant H2A.Bbd is associated with active transcription and mRNA processing in human cells. Mol Cell 47, 596-607 (2012)) and found that shRNA-induced H2A.B loss reduces proliferation in DLBCL, HL and ALCL cell lines (FIGS. 10A and 10B). This reduction in proliferation was not observed when the EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell line IM-9 was transduced with the same shRNA. Additionally, no reduction in global H2A levels were observed (FIGS. 10A and 10B)—the most likely off-target candidate. The combination of CRISPR data and shRNA data from this Example demonstrate that H2A.B promotes cancer cell growth.

**Example 4**

This Example describes that the anthracycline agent, aclarubicin, maximizes apoptosis while minimizing DNA damage in three different cancer cell lines.

Specific embodiments disclosed in this Example illustrate that aclarubicin efficiently kills lymphoma cells as measured by cleaved PARP, while inducing much less DNA damage, as measured by γ-H2A.X, than either doxorubicin or etoposide (FIGS. 11-13).

Specifically, as illustrated in FIG. 11A, experiments were performed on a Hodgkin's lymphoma cell line (L-1236) to test the cytotoxicity of aclarubicin (100 nM, 500 nM, 1.0 μM, and 5.0 μM) compared to etoposide (100 nM, 500 nM, 1.0 μM, and 5.0 μM) and doxorubicin (100 nM, 500 nM, 1.0 μM, and 5.0 μM), which are other commonly used cancer therapeutics. FIG. 11A is a Western blot gel assessing expression of the markers listed on the y-axis. The specific cancer therapeutics and the amounts used are indicated by the numbers along the x-axis and the corresponding figure legend. In this Example, aclarubicin's cytotoxicity on lymphoma cells was assessed by determining the amount of cleaved PARP, which was assessed as band intensity (FIG. 11B) from the Western blot (FIG. 11A). In this Example, aclarubicin's corresponding DNA damage was assessed by measuring the amount of γ-H2A.X, which was assessed as band intensity (FIG. 11B) from the Western blot (FIG. 11A). Specifically, as illustrated in FIG. 11B, the relative band intensity of PARP/tubulin, PARP/γ-H2A.X, and γ-H2A.X/Tubulin all indicate that aclarubicin has the best combination of anti-neoplastic activity while having fewer harmful side effects compare to either etoposide or doxorubicin.

In FIGS. 12 and 13, similar experiments were performed to compare the cytotoxicity of aclarubicin to etoposide and doxorubicin in additional lymphoma cell lines. In FIG. 12, the compounds cytotoxicity and side effects were assessed in the Hodgkin's lymphoma cell line, L-428. In FIG. 13, the compounds cytotoxicity and side effects were assessed in the diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell line, A3/KAW. Similar to FIG. 11, the results from FIGS. 12 and 13 indicate that aclarubicin has the best combination of anti-neoplastic activity while having fewer harmful side effects compare to either etoposide or doxorubicin.

The results from this Example indicate that aclarubicin has a much more favorable side effect profile than doxorubicin and has more anti-neoplastic activity than etoposide. Therefore, lymphoma treatment regimens incorporating aclarubicin as the cytotoxic agent will lead to safer more effective treatment options for patients.

While illustrative embodiments have been illustrated and described, it will be appreciated that various changes can be made therein without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention.

