# One-sentence Summary

Inspired by natural adaptations of polar animals, we redesign the textile with optical polymer materials to support thermoregulation with on-body solar thermal collection.

# Results

Biomimetic system design and material selection. Traditionally, textiles have been made from a limited material set. Natural or synthetic bers are spun and woven into thick fabrics that inhibit heat diffusion between the body and the environment. Perhaps due to the lack of suitable materials, traditional textile design has largely overlooked the management of radiative heat (i.e. energy carried by light). Recently, this has begun to change with, for example, the development of radiative heating textiles enabled by re ective metallic coatings (17) and radiative cooling textiles enabled by IR transparent polyethylene bers (24). A performance gap still exists for more e cient personal heating in a comfortable, familiar textile format. One way forward is to not only limit dissipation of radiant body heat outward, but to also optimize absorption of ambient radiant energy inward. The power density of sunlight, for example, is su cient (100-1000 W/m 2 ) to augment typical metabolic heat production (~ 70-120 W/m 2 ). It is therefore unsurprising to see both directions of radiative energy management in adaptations of polar animals.

Two natural structures inspire the design of our solar thermal textile. The rst is a type of structural coloration in some species of cold-adapted moths and butter ies that enables selective absorption of visible-NIR light and suppression of thermal (IR) emission (Fig. 1a). (3,6) In this case, melanin is the optically active material. With an electron-dense pi-pi stacked structure, melanin behaves as a disordered organic semiconductor and has a signi cantly higher refractive index than most biopolymers.(4, 5) A variety of donor-acceptor units enable broadband light absorption, while a high optical density enables light interference effects (IR re ection) in melanin-enriched wing coatings. The second source of inspiration is the pelt of the polar bear which, key to the animal's survival in the extreme cold, simultaneously provides high thermal resistance (R) and high solar utilization (Fig. 1b). The dual function arises from a speci c material set and optical structure. Lacking melanin pigment, hollow hair bers have a low optical density and e ciently forward-scatter light, permitting photothermal capture at the melanized skin while inhibiting heat loss to the environment. (2,9,11,25,26) The essential optical structure of the pelt -a transmitter-insulator (transparent hair) stacked above an absorber (darkened skin) -e ciently harvests solar thermal energy to support thermoregulation in the extreme cold. While several groups have reported personal heating materials nominally mimicking polar bear fur, none have demonstrated this crucial optical structure nor a transmitting insulator fabric. (27)(28)(29) More accurate polar bear inspired textiles and structures have been reported for building-level solar collectors, (25,30,31) but here we analyze the energetic signi cance of direct radiative capture at the body-environment interface and show the high thermoregulation e ciency of a wearable solar thermal textile.

To mimic such adaptations, we engineered a bilayer textile using optical polymer materials (Fig. 1c). The bottom layer is a nylon fabric robustly vapor coated with the conjugated polymer PEDOT, enabling selective absorption of visible light and suppression of IR emission. In structure and function, the soft material PEDOT bears resemblance to melanin. This pi-pi stacked electronic polymer interacts strongly with light due to high free-electron density associated with long conjugated chains. (32) While PEDOT is an organic conductor, it shares the same broadband vis-NIR light absorption of melanin due to plasmon (surface electron) resonance near 1000 nm with a high optical density κ. (22) At longer wavelengths into the IR, PEDOT is a re ector (a weak emitter). Like the melanin-enriched microstructure of moth wings, a PEDOT coating can therefore be used to e ciently manage radiative heat transfer between the body and the environment. Photothermal heat generated at the PEDOT-nylon absorber is further trapped by the top layer, a semi-transparent fabric mimicking the light colored fur of polar animals. This lightweight fabric (Agribon AG-19)( 33) is made of low optical density polypropylene bers that forward-scatter visible light with about 85% transmission and more weakly transmit IR light with about 60% transmission (Figure S1).

By con ning solar thermal heat as both a diffusion and IR radiation barrier, AG-19 essentially acts like a breathable greenhouse material. Indeed, it is used in the agricultural industry for this purpose. Individual bers are visualized in an optical transmission micrograph in Fig. 1e. Fiber diameter is in the range of 9-10 microns, comparable to IR wavelengths and thus capable of Mie scattering to trap IR radiation. (34) As with polyethylene and other polyole ns, polypropylene is an attractive material for textiles for its potential sustainability, durability, and ultra-light weight. (24) Along with the spectrally selective PEDOT-nylon fabric, the fabric transmitter layer operates differently than traditional textiles and has the potential to provide highly e cient thermoregulation.

Optical and thermoregulation characterization. A one-micron thick coating of PEDOT onto nylon fabric dramatically changes the surface optical properties due to the high optical density of PEDOT. Figure 2a visualizes this change in photographs and thermal images. Under a commercial lightbulb, the coated fabric absorbs more photothermal energy relative to the re ective uncoated nylon. Over an IR source (human body), the coated fabric emits less thermal energy (appears colder) than the high emissivity surface of the uncoated nylon. These effects are quanti ed in Fig. 2b, where emissivity of the coated fabric (blue) and uncoated (black) is plotted against wavelength. The uncoated nylon fabric shows a behavior typical of traditional textiles: low emissivity (absorbance) in the visible and high emissivity in the IR. With a PEDOT coating, this optical behavior is reversed, and the fabric behaves more like an ideal photothermal absorber.

With the ability to control the optical properties of the fabric, we next evaluate the thermoregulating performance of a set of traditional and unconventional fabrics. A simple way to conceptualize this task is by considering the lowest temperature rating for which a certain textile can maintain the wearer's thermal comfort. Warmer textiles are needed for colder environments (Fig. 3a). More speci cally, a textile should limit the loss of body heat (~ 75 W/m 2 for an average adult at rest) to the environment so that a comfortable skin temperature (33 o C) is maintained at steady state. Excluding factors like wind chill and humidity, this situation is simulated in a chamber depicted in Fig. 3b. For a given textile sample, the temperature of a skin heater with a constant output is monitored by a controller that lowers the environmental temperature until thermal comfort (T skin = 33 o C) is reached at steady state. A similar chamber design was previously used to evaluate passive heating solutions,( 17) except here a window allows for environmental light (radiative energy) input to the textile-skin system.

Uncoated and PEDOT-coated nylon were tested, as well as a range of traditional and non-traditional textile comparators of varying weights, as shown in Fig. 3c for thermal insulation becomes less favorable to thermoregulation.

Taking the temperature rating of the cotton jersey fabric as a baseline for the other measurements allows comparison of textile performance in both light and dark conditions (Fig. 3f). While the thick, insulating cotton terry fabric shows good performance in dark conditions (+ 1.6 o C relative to cotton jersey), it has relatively weak performance in light conditions (+ 1.3 o C). This is representative of traditional textilesthick, opaque insulation that limits heat dissipation outward also necessarily limits photothermal heat transfer inward. On the other hand, the bilayer textile excels in both dark (+ 2.7 o C) and light (+ 9.9 o C) conditions due to the insulating yet light-transmitting AG-19 layer.

Other wearable photothermal mimics comprise outward-facing darkly colored surfaces, (27)(28)(29) which may explain the reduced solar heating effect (relative to cotton T-shirt, + 5.5 o C versus + 9.9 o C) of one such report.(Figure S1) We con rm the importance of optical structure by reversing our absorber-transmitter stack, i.e. facing the dark colored PEDOT surface outward, which signi cantly reduces relative performance (+ 7.1 o C versus + 9.9 o C).(Figure S2) This is in agreement with counterintuitive observations that darker colored pelt features, due to inhibited light transmission, may achieve less solar utilization than light colored pelts. (9)(10)(11) Modeling textile thermoregulation under illumination. While previous work in radiative heating textiles has studied the impact of IR surface properties, here we study the combined impact of IR and visible optical properties on personal heating under moderate light intensity. As a simple case, we focus on an absorberonly system which, due to the broad IR and visible transparency of the transmitter layer (Figure S3), may also inform the bilayer textile design. (Figure S4) Our steady-state heat transfer model (Supplementary Note 1) of the skin-textile system includes incident radiation (130 W/m 2 ) and a natural convection coe cient that varies with the skin-environment temperature difference (Fig. 4a). The results of the simulation are shown in Fig. 4b and experimental data points of uncoated and PEDOT coated nylon are overlaid. The performance of the radiative heated textile is optimized at maximum solar absorbance and minimum thermal emissivity, and we note that the PEDOT coating brings the nylon fabric closer to this target. At 130 W/m 2 , the dependence of environmental temperature on solar absorbance is roughly comparable to that of thermal emissivity; however, at greater radiance (325 W/m 2 ), solar absorbance becomes the dominant contributor. (Figure S5).

To understand realistic sunlight utilization, the human body is approximated as a vertical cylinder(36) and normal incident radiance per total surface area (typically 1.8 m 2 for adults) is calculated across the year assuming half of the body is illuminated. For solar-powered personal heating, a convenient coincidence is that the coldest season may correspond with the maximum solar radiance on a vertical body due to the reduced solar elevation. In Boston, MA, for example, the calculated on-body radiance of direct sunlight increases from about 108 W/m 2 at the summer solstice to about 325 W/m 2 at the winter solstice. The presence of snow elds can also dramatically increase overall solar insolation values, as is the case in polar environments, which may further double the incident solar contribution.(8) With a combined body-surface irradiance of 650 W/m 2 , the available wintertime solar thermal power at high latitudes may therefore be up to 10 times larger than the body heat generated by a moderately active adult (70-120 W/m 2 ). (37) The bulky, opaque nature of winter outerwear assures low utilization of this power source, as the weak solar heating of the thick cotton terry fabric demonstrated above suggests. On the other hand, the bilayer textile described here harnesses sunlight to provide remarkable heating for its weight. Exposed to the calculated wintertime radiance of 650 W/m 2 , the textile supports thermal homeostasis as low as -28 o C (Figure S6), approaching the temperature extremes of the polar environment. Indoors, a light capturing textile can support the development of passive solar architectures(38) as personal heating and design elements, as well as be powered by existing indoor light xtures capable of the lower radiance levels modeled here. (39) Wearability characterization. Everyday clothing is expected to be comfortable, breathable, and washable. The optically-active textiles presented herein were also evaluated for these functions. Despite being nonwoven, the AG-19 transmitter fabric has many familiar textile qualities that make it suitable for garments and apparel, upholstery, and décor. The nonwoven material has a similar drape to traditional woven textiles (Fig. 5a) and may be sewn and ironed without damage. Advancing from the framesupported textile presented earlier, we next demonstrate the use of such materials in a self-supported garment made by sewing two layers of AG-19 and ironing pleats to form insulating ba es. PEDOT-nylon is then sewn to the bottom to complete the solar thermal textile (Fig. 5b). This textile performs similarly to the previously characterized bilayer structure and, importantly, is stable after three washing cycles using common laundry detergent and after two total hours of light exposure (130 W/m 2 )(Fig. 5c). Optical microscopy of the PEDOT coating across washings shows a small change in color and no damage to the mechanical stability of the lms (Figure S7). A water vapor transmission test across an AG-19/PEDOTnylon stack reveals that this bilayer is as breathable as other common fabrics used in the study (Fig. 5d).

This is unsurprising given the diffuse open mesh of the AG-19 fabric, designed to be breathable, and the hydrophilic nature of PEDOT.( 23)

# Discussion

Here we leverage optical polymer materials to design a radiative heating textile as a wearable mimic of the absorber-transmitter structure of the polar bear skin and fur and are the rst to demonstrate the dramatic personal heating effect this structure has when worn on the body. While retaining familiar textile qualities, the bilayer design suppresses radiative dissipation of body heat and maximizes radiative absorption of visible-NIR light. Due to a faithful imitation of the light collecting structure and function of polar bear pelt, the garment achieves a signi cantly greater personal heating performance than other nominal mimics which either lack a transmitter or sacri ce solar utilization for thermal insulation. (27)(28)(29) Under moderate illumination of 130 W/m 2 (ca. 0.1 sun), this textile maintains the wearer's thermal comfort down to 4.2 o C -an additional heating effect of 10 o C relative to a typical cotton T-shirt that is 30% heavier. Under full sunlight, the garment supports thermal homeostasis in extreme conditions as low as -28 o C.

Using similar design methods, it is also possible adapt our strategy to radiative cooling and access a re ector-emitter structure like that found on the Saharan silver ant.(1) By rejecting solar heat and dissipating thermal heat through the atmospheric window, such a structure may allow adaptive living in extremely hot conditions. The material properties and vapor deposition of PEDOT can enable different kinds of optical control beyond the photothermal effect shown here. When used with speci c surface geometries, the plasmon-coupled light interactions of PEDOT can also be directed to produce the high re ectivity needed for daytime radiative cooling. (40)(41)(42)(43) The oxidative vapor deposition process used in this work is uniquely suited for such optical engineering purposes. Electronic polymer coatings of precise thickness can be conformally deposited over complex surface arrays which may, like the faceted triangular hairs that endow the silver ant with its optical thermoregulation, possess features ranging in size from sub-micron to micron. (44) The second adaption of our strategy involves designing a transparent thermal emitter layer. While the polypropylene bers here primarily serve to transmit visible light, Mie scattering theory informs optical tuning toward high IR emittance by adjusting ber size and geometry to achieve dielectric resonance at IR frequencies. (45) The solar thermal textile presented here is a exible, lightweight platform for collecting radiative energy. Indoors, this technology can enable e cient thermoregulation by local, low-power lighting (i.e. LEDs) as well as support the design of passive solar architectures. Outdoors, a lightweight solar textile will make winterwear more comfortable and enable passively heated shelters for adaptive living in harsher climates. As the energy and environmental crises progress, reinventing textiles with polymer-enabled light and heat control will prove increasingly useful.     

# Declarations Figures

## Icons:

"sun" by Matias Canobra is licensed under CC BY 3.0 "Six-Spotter Forester" by Brooke Lewis is licensed under CC BY 3.0 "polar bear" by Tamiko Young is licensed under CC BY 3.0

# Supplementary Files

This is a list of supplementary les associated with this preprint. Click to download. solarthermaltextilessupplementary922.docx

