# Results

## Effects Of Electrode Composition On Cell Performance

A Ca–Mg (20–80 mol%)||Bi cell whose design is depicted in Fig. 1a was cycled at 200 mA cm−2 current density and 650 °C operating temperature. As shown in Fig. 1b the cell achieved 98% coulombic and 62% energy efficiencies with a discharge voltage of 0.52 V. The self-discharge current density of the cell, ∼1 mA cm−2, is extremely low (see Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Note 1), comparable with that of the best-performing Li||Sb–Pb cells2. Even though the concentration of calcium in the negative electrode was quite low (20 mol%) the open-circuit voltage decreased only 0.18 V from that of a cell fitted with a pure calcium negative electrode1812. The volumetric energy density (electrodes basis) of this cell was 197 Wh L−1 (see Supplementary Table 2). In contrast, the higher calcium concentration Ca–Mg (90–10 mol%)||Bi cell maintained a cell-discharge voltage above 0.71 V and energy efficiency exceeding 70% (Fig. 1b). The volumetric energy density of the cell increased to 329 Wh L−1 (see Supplementary Table 3). The high concentration of calcium in the negative electrode caused a slight reduction in coulombic efficiency to 96% as a result of a somewhat elevated self-discharge current density (≈4 mA cm−2 as shown in Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Note 1). This is well explained by the fact that at 600 °C the activity of calcium in magnesium is 2.9 × 10−2 for 20–80 mol% Ca–Mg and ≈1 for 90–10 mol% Ca–Mg (ref. 12). Upon addition of 10 mol% of magnesium, the self-discharge current density was halved with almost no voltage penalty (≈0.01 V (refs 8, 12)) when compared with that of the pure Ca||Bi cell (≈ 10 mA cm−2). In sum, the Ca–Mg||Bi cells were designed to suppress the self-discharge current density while maintaining high cell voltage at a reduced operating temperature. In addition, a Ca–Mg negative electrode with a LiCl–CaCl2 electrolyte can be operated with an antimony (Sb) positive electrode. With higher-cell voltage (0.88 V), higher energy efficiency (74%), and higher volumetric energy density (384 Wh L−1, see Supplementary Table 4) the cell with an Sb positive electrode outperforms one with a Bi positive electrode as shown in Fig. 1b.

## Cell Performance At Lower Operating Temperature

Exploiting the low eutectic temperatures of both the Ca–Mg alloy (90–10 mol%) and the binary LiCl–CaCl2 electrolyte, we were able to decrease the cell operating temperature to 550 °C and obtain smooth voltage time traces at current densities ranging from 100 to 955 mA cm−2 (Fig. 2a). In parallel, the self-discharge current density of Ca–Mg (90–10 mol%)||Bi cells was found to decrease to <1 mA cm−2 (Supplementary Fig. 1), which we attribute to the decrease in solubility of Ca in the electrolyte4715. The fall in discharge capacity with increasing current density is a consequence of the fact that at high current densities the deposition rate of Ca at the electrode-electrolyte interface exceeds the rate of diffusion of Ca metal away from the electrode-electrolyte interface in the Bi positive electrode1011. Because the theoretical capacity of the cell was defined as the mole fraction of calcium, at which the nucleation of the Ca11Bi10 phase occurs (25 mol% at 550 °C (ref. 8)), at high-current densities it is possible to reach this stoichiometry locally at the interface before the bulk metal electrode reaches this composition. The dependence of cell voltage on current density at several discharged states (9.3, 22.6 and 41.0% of theoretical capacity) is shown in Fig. 2b. The linearity in the I–V characteristic of the cell is evidence of the facile kinetics of the charge/discharge processes. This cell cycled at 200 mA cm−2 for over 1,400 cycles with 99% coulombic efficiency and 70% round-trip energy efficiency as depicted in Fig. 2c. The average volumetric energy density of this cell was 228 Wh L−1 (see Supplementary Table 5). Additionally noteworthy was that these metrics were achieved without observable voltage loss, side reactions or capacity fade as shown in Fig. 2c,d. Long service life-time translates to low cost of ownership, which is the most important parameter for grid-scale energy storage. No calcium metal battery has ever exhibited such stability.

## Analysis Of Charge–Discharge Reactions

Figure 3 shows the cross-section of a Ca–Mg (90–10 mol%)|| Bi cell in a partially discharged state. After 400 cycles at 550 °C, electrodes were subjected to chemical analysis by direct current plasma emission spectrometry. No corrosion was observed on either the negative or positive current collector. Significantly, both negative and positive electrodes in the partially discharged cells contain Li (Supplementary Table 6). This means that both the Ca and Li ions in the multi-cation salt co-alloy and co-dealloy with both the negative and positive electrodes during charge and discharge. Furthermore, the absence of Mg in the positive electrode proves that there is no participation on the part of Mg in the cell electrochemistry, that is, Mg acts purely as a solvent to reduce the melting point of the negative electrode. The cell reactions can be represented as





# Discussion

This unique multi-cation salt gives rise to the possibility of a multi-element LMB, in which a plurality of active metals participates in faradaic reactions. The high coulombic efficiency (>99%) and excellent retention of discharge capacity observed during lithium co-deposition indicate that the electrode reactions are fully bi-directional. Recognition that co-deposition in a battery can be managed to advantage broadens the selection of salt composition and extends the prediction of the capacity limit. This is in sharp contrast to the practice in calcium electrorefining which considers only those salts, for example, CaCl2–KCl, that obviate or suppress significant co-deposition to maintain the purity of the metal product16. The fact that this cell operates without need for an ion-selective membrane between the electrodes as is the case with sodium–sulfur and sodium–nickel chloride (ZEBRA) batteries, which rely on a β″-alumina separator, for example, sets this battery chemistry apart from all others. This membrane-free cell designed with a plurality of mitigation strategies opens up multi-element participation, which suppresses Ca reactivity, lowers operating temperature, and finally realizes a Ca-metal-based rechargeable battery that has the potential to meet the performance requirements of grid-scale energy storage applications.

# Methods

## Cell Configuration

The negative current collector (NCC) consists of an 18–8 stainless steel threaded rod and a column-shaped Fe–Ni foam. The Fe–Ni foam was 13 mm in diameter, 10 mm in height, and 60 ppi in porosity. A mild steel (AISI 1018) crucible served as the positive current collector (PCC) for Bi. A graphite crucible served as the PCC for Sb. The dimensions of the PCCs were 25 mm in outer diameter, 83 mm in height, 77 mm in depth and 20 mm in inner diameter. The foam NCC was positioned 15 mm above the PCC. By surface tension the foam NCC holds the metal of the negative electrode and thus prevents keeps it from shorting to the positive current collector. The surface area of positive electrode was estimated at 3.14 cm2 by assuming the interface between it and the electrolyte to be perfectly flat. This value was used to derive the current density.

## Materials Preparation

Pure Ca (99.99%, Aldrich), Mg (99.95%, Alfa Aesar), Bi (99.999%, Aldrich) and Sb (99.9999%, Alfa Aesar) were used for electrodes. These metals were melted in the PCCs by an induction heater (MTI Corporation, EQ-SP-15A), installed inside the glovebox with an inert argon atmosphere (O2<0.1 p.p.m., H2O<0.1 p.p.m.). Pure Ca and Mg were melted in a mild steel cup by the induction heater, and then the NCCs were immersed in the liquid Ca–Mg alloy for 10 min.

High-purity anhydrous salts of LiCl (99.995%, Alfa Aesar) and CaCl2 (99.99%, Alfa Aesar) were used. The salts were weighed out in appropriate quantities in ∼500 g batches, mixed, and transferred to an alumina crucible which was then placed in a stainless steel vacuum chamber, the chamber sealed, and loaded into a furnace. To prepare a dry, homogenous molten salt solution, the test chamber was (1) evacuated to ∼1 Pa, (2) heated at 80 °C for 12 h under vacuum, (3) heated at 230 °C for 12 h under vacuum, (4) purged with ultra-high-purity argon gas (99.999%, O2<1 p.p.m., H2O<1 p.p.m., Airgas Inc) and (5) heated at 700 °C for 3 h under argon gas flowing at 0.2 cm3 s−1. After cooling to room temperature, the pre-melted electrolyte was transferred back to the glove box and ground into powder (≈10 μm in diameter). Supplementary Table 7 reports the masses of metal and salt in each cell. To accelerate the measurement of long-term capacity fade at deep discharge (within several months instead of years), we reduced the size of the electrodes of the cell in Fig. 2. It is important to restrict the depletion of LiCl so as to avoid solidification of the molten salt. According to the phase diagram of LiCl–CaCl2 (ref. 14), at 550 °C for example, the liquid range of composition in the LiCl–CaCl2 molten salt is 58–77 mol% of LiCl. To operate the cells at ∼1 Ah capacity we used ∼12 g of electrolyte thereby preventing solidification of the LiCl–CaCl2 melt caused by depletion of LiCl via co-deposition of Li.

## Cell Assembly

Cells were loaded in the stainless steel vacuum chamber and subjected to the same drying process as were the salts (80 °C for 12 h and 230 °C for 12 h under vacuum). Then, the cells were connected to a battery tester (Model 4300, Maccor). The cells were heated under open circuit condition. After the temperature reached the liquidus of the electrolyte (485 °C), the cell voltage was held at 1.25 V until the current became steady.

## Analysis

The measurement of self-discharge current density was performed after the cell reached the operating temperature and the current became steady at a constant applied voltage of 1.1 V reported in Supplementary Fig. 1 and of 1.25 V reported in Supplementary Table 1. The charging and discharging voltage time traces were measured at constant current density. Data were acquired by battery testing instrumentation (Model 4300, Maccor). Coulombic efficiency (ηQ) was calculated from charging capacity (QC) and discharging capacity (QD), . Energy efficiency (ηE) was calculated from charging energy (EC) and discharging energy (ED), . Discharge voltage (VD) was calculated from discharge capacity and discharge energy (VD=ED/QD). Theoretical discharge capacity of the cell was defined as the mole fraction of calcium, at which the nucleation of the Ca11Bi10 phase occurs (25 mol% at 550 °C and 27 mol% at 650 °C (ref. 8)) or the Ca11Sb10 phase (23 mol% at 650 °C (ref. 11)) assuming that only calcium participates in charge/discharge reaction. The volumetric energy density was calculated using the volumes of electrodes as shown in Supplementary Tables 2–5. Direct-current plasma emission spectrometry was carried out by Luvak Inc., following ASTM E 1097–12.

# Additional Information

How to cite this article: Ouchi, T. et al. Calcium-based multi-element chemistry for grid-scale electrochemical energy storage. Nat. Commun. 7:10999 doi: 10.1038/ncomms10999 (2016).

