# INTRODUCTION

For development and spread of the Internet of Things (IoT), an edge device with much reduced power consumption is required. The power consumption in the edge-AI device based on CMOS technology is a big issue when operating AI systems for such as, machine learning and product-sum operations. Spin-transfertorque (STT)-magnetic random access memory (MRAM) is one of the best candidate for low power-consumption devices because of its non-volatility. Recently, embedded perpendicular STT-MRAM with high endurance and low write current was able to replace embedded flash memory. 1 Moreover, to replace the last level cache (LLC) and SRAM, it is required that STT-MRAM have high performance with higher write endurance (>10 12 ) as same as SRAM and higher write speed operation with lower write current. 2 The perpendicular STT-MRAM is known to increase the write current with decrease of the write pulse width, and its increase of the write current produces stress and damage on the tunnel barrier layer of magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) that involves the limit of write endurance. Because of the increasing access time, higher endurance might be required not only to replace SRAM but also to provide other types of memory optimized for AI systems in the future. To mitigate these issues, three-terminal spin orbit torque (SOT)-MRAM was proposed. [3][4][5] SOT effects including the spin current (spin Hall effect and/or Rashba-Edelstein effect) can switch magnetization of a free layer very rapidly (<1 ns) 6 using in-plane current through a SOT effective layer, like heavy metal. This in-plane write current might realize the three-terminal device to avoid the stress to the MTJ tunnel barrier. However, there has been no experimental proof of less damage to the tunnel barrier of a MTJ or of high endurance of more than 10 12 cycles. 7 Herein, we call the memory and memory-like devices that use the SOT effect, Spin Current-type (SC)-Memory. In the work in this paper, we demonstrated high write endurance of 10 12 cycles with a single MTJ element for a SC-Memory cell, and herein propose that one failure model is caused only on the SOT-line by electrical-open and electrical-short conditions. Furthermore, we present a small SC-Memory array of 8×8 elements.

# EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE

We fabricated a SC single MTJ element and small SC MTJ array. Our MTJ was a top-pinned type MTJ with a tungsten layer as the SOT line. The stacking layer included thermal oxide Si ARTICLE scitation.org/journal/adv substrate/W/CoFeB-based free layer/MgO tunnel barrier/CoFeBbased Synthetic Antiferromagnetic (SAF) -pinned layer/IrMn/ Capping layer. We used the sputter method without breaking vacuum. To obtain high SOT efficiency, the W-SOT had high resistivity (around 400 µΩ⋅cm) controlled by the sputtering condition.

The dimensions of the W-SOT line were thickness of 3 nm, length of 700 nm, and width of 360 nm. The shape of the MTJ was an ellipse 120×360 nm. The direction of magnetization of the free layer in the MTJ was in-plane and orthogonal to the direction of the write current through the SOT line. This was due to the thick free layer and its shape anisotropy. This MTJ device was called Type-Y and could switch the magnetization without an external magnetic field. shift field of the free layer (H shift ) caused by the stray field from the SAF-pinned layer was around -60 Oe. For measurement of the SC single MTJ element, we used a pulse generator to inject the write pulse through the W-SOT line in order to switch the free layer magnetization. On the other hand, for the 8×8 SC Memory array, we fabricated a write/read analog circuit for it that was controlled by FPGA for measurement of the speed and duration of 64 MTJ elements (Figure 4(a)).

# RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 1(b) shows in-plane write pulse current switching by SOT effect with an external magnetic field of zero. We applied a pulse current of each pulse width into the W-SOT line first, and then measured the MTJ resistance via DC voltage. We varied the write pulse width from 1µ to 1n sec. The inset of Figure 1(b) shows MR-J curves with variable pulse width of 5, 10, and 20 ns. Moreover, Figure 1(b) shows the relationship between the threshold current density and varied write pulse width. Threshold current density was defined as the average of ten events in which the magnetization state of parallel (P) was switched to anti parallel (AP), or from AP to P. We obtained a clear relationship of increase of the threshold current density with decrease of the pulse current width, similar to past reports. [5][6][7] We compared our threshold current density with 5 ns pulse width with that from earlier work. 7 This study demonstrated SOT magnetization switching and discussed the energy efficiency of STT and SOT using an MTJ device with a W-SOT line and perpendicular magnetization of the free layer (called Type-Z). We estimated the comparable threshold current density of 9.7×10 7 A/cm 2 to that on the order of 1.0 × 10 8 A/cm 2 7 despite the difference between Type-Y and Type-Z. According to Ref. 7, this magnetization switching energy efficiency by SOT type was higher than that of the STT type when the pulse width was < 1 ns.

Next, we demonstrated a write endurance test using the SC single MTJ element. The measurement sequence of the write endurance test is shown in Figure 2(a). We defined the write pulse current density of J, as the write pulse width t_write and cycle time t_cycle (t_cycle = t_write + t_wait). The write cycle was defined as 10 n cycles to apply +J to write the state of P-to-AP for 10 n /2 cycles and to apply -J to write the state of AP-to-P for 10 n /2 cycles. After the write sequence of 10 n cycles, the availability of write/read operations of the SC single MTJ element was checked. In the write/read operation, we applied a write pulse current of +J/-J as the same current density as during the write sequence and we measured the MTJ resistance using DC current during the read sequence. The external magnetic field was 0 Oe. The data from these write/read sequences for 100 cycles was plotted in Figure 2(b). There, we set the parameter of J at 6.7×10 7 A/cm 2 , t_write at 10 ns, and t_cycle at 110 ns (t_wait was 100 ns). We operated the write/read sequence at 1×10 11 , 2×10 11 , 5×10 11 , and 1×10 12 cycles. Although the MTJ resistance showed a little drift with increasing write cycles, a TMR ratio of about 90 % was sustained.

On the other hand, a few write errors occurred in this write endurance test from using J of 6.7×10 7 A/cm 2 (Figure 2(b), red triangle). To evaluate the critical write current density with pulse width of 10 ns, we obtained the write probability in 100 write events (inset of Figure 3(a)). In the case of positive current density for the magnetization switching of P-to-AP, J of 6.7×10 7   realize 100 % magnetization switching. In contrast, in the case of negative current density of -6.7×10 7 A/cm 2 for AP-to-P, the write probability barely reached threshold. This asymmetry in probability might involve a stray field as H shift and might be resolved to regulate the stray field to zero using the film structure of the SAF-pinned layer, or to increase the thermal stability factor to a negligible value.

To improve the write error, we carried out a write endurance test with increasing write current density to 8.3×10 7 A/cm 2 . Although we tried some tests to show endurance with this higher write current density, we obtained broken MTJ elements associated only with electrical-open failure or electrical-short failure. Figure 3(a) shows the write endurance result and Figure 3(b) and(c) show the cross sectional TEM images of an electrical-open element and electrical-short element, respectively. With higher write current density of 8.3×10 7 A/cm 2 , TMR remained within below 5×10 10 cycles. However, above 1×10 11 cycles, element resistance including the resistance of the W-SOT line, increased with increase of the write cycle, and resistance of W-SOT line came up to the electricalopen condition. According to the cross-sectional TEM image of this element (Figure 3(b)), the W-SOT line burst. In contrast, the MTJ seems to have had no damage owing to clear interfaces at the W-SOT line/Free layer and the Free layer/tunnel barrier layer. Moreover, the cross sectional TEM image of the electrical-short failure element is shown in Figure 3(c). According to this TEM image, the electricalshort failure might have occurred owing to a metal bridge from the W-SOT line. It seems that the W-SOT material ran up one side wall of the MTJ element. A possible interpretation of these results is that Joule heating arising from the high resistivity of the W-SOT line induced the bursting and migration of the W-SOT line. We suggest that lower resistivity and/or a SOT line of shorter length might achieve higher write endurance and avoid the damage caused by Joule heating. Finally, we report the write endurance result of the 8×8 SC-Memory array. To investigate the mode of failure in the write endurance, a statistical result should be required because a failure element can occur incidentally. Although a 64-MTJ-element array is not sufficient for a statistical result, we think it is better than a single MTJ element. We fabricated the 64-MTJ-element array with a write/read analog circuit controlled by FPGA, as shown in Figure 4(a). The write/read analog circuit had selectors, a write-pulse generating circuit consisting of some transistors, and a read circuit.

Because we did not estimate the total impedance of the write-pulse generating circuit, the absolute value of the write current density is not yet clear. At this time, we report an accelerated test of failure elements by increasing the write current density in three levels (J 1 < J 2 < J 3 ). In Figure 4(b), is shown that the MTJ element survival ratio as a function of the write cycles depends on the write current density. Because of the difference of yield among arrays, we enumerated the survival of MTJ elements after each endurance test. We obtained a clear relation showing that the number of failure elements increased with increase of the current density, just as for a single MTJ element.

# CONCLUSIONS

We demonstrated high write endurance of 10 12 write cycles with Spin Current type Memory by using the SOT effect. We showed experimental proof that the SC-Memory had high endurance because the MTJ seemed undamaged. On the other hand, we observed the definite burst and migration of a W-SOT line. Finally, we showed the write endurance result of an 8×8 SC-Memory array and an accelerated test of failure elements by increasing the write current density.

